Accessing the Low-polar Molecular Composition of Boreal and Arctic Peat Burning Organic
Aerosol via Thermal Analysis and Ultrahigh-Resolution Mass Spectrometry: Structural Motifs
and Their Formation
Eric Schneider1,2, Anika Neumann1,2, Martha L. Chacón-Patiño3, Markus Somero4, Meri M. Ruppel5, Mika
Ihalainen4, Kajar Köster4, Olli Sippula4,6, Hendryk Czech1,7, Christopher P. Rüger1,2,*, Ralf Zimmermann1,2,7

Joint Mass Spectrometry Centre, Department of Analytical and Technical Chemistry, University of

1

Rostock, 18059 Rostock, Germany
Department Life, Light & Matter (LL&M), University of Rostock, 18059 Rostock, Germany

2

National High Magnetic Field Laboratory, Florida State University, 32310 Tallahassee, United States

3

Department of Environmental and Biological Sciences, University of Eastern Finland, 70210 Kuopio,

4

Finland
Atmospheric Composition Unit, Finnish Meteorological Institute, 00014 Helsinki, Finland

5

Department of Chemistry, University of Eastern Finland, 80101 Joensuu, Finland

6

Joint Mass Spectrometry Centre, Cooperation Group “Comprehensive Molecular Analytics” (CMA),

7

Helmholtz Centre Munich, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany
Corresponding author email: Christopher P. Rüger (christopher.rueger@uni-rostock.de)

Keywords:
peat burning, organic aerosol, ultrahigh-resolution mass spectrometry, thermal analysis,
infrared multiphoton dissociation (IRMPD), structural motifs

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-k8ld5 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9634-9239 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

Abstract
Peatland fires emit organic carbon rich particulate matter into the atmosphere. Boreal and Arctic
peatlands are becoming more vulnerable to wildfires, resulting in a need for better understanding of the
emissions of these special fires. Extractable, non-, and low-polar organic aerosol species emitted from
laboratory-based boreal and Arctic peat burning experiments are analyzed by direct-infusion atmospheric
pressure photoionization (APPI) ultrahigh-resolution mass spectrometry (UHRMS) and compared to timeresolved APPI UHRMS evolved gas analysis from the thermal analysis of peat under inert nitrogen
(pyrolysis) and oxidative atmosphere. The chemical composition is characterized on a molecular level,
revealing abundant aromatic compounds that partially contain oxygen, nitrogen or sulfur and are formed
at characteristic temperatures. Two main structural motifs are identified: single-core and multicore, and
their temperature dependent formation is assigned to the thermal degradation of the lignocellulose
building blocks and other parts of peat.

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-k8ld5 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9634-9239 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

1. Introduction
Particulate matter (PM) emitted from biomass burning (BB) directly affects the radiation budget of the
atmosphere and likewise constitutes a risk for human health. 1–3 In addition to those particles’ physical
properties (size, shape), the chemical properties, e.g., oxidative potential, light absorption ability or acting
as cloud condensation nuclei, are affected by the complex molecular composition of the organic carbon
(OC) fraction. The characterization of the highly variable composition of the organic aerosol (OA) provides
information on factors like fuel type, combustion conditions and the degree of atmospheric processing.
Peatland fires are known to emit particularly high amounts of OC rich PM and have been frequently
observed in warmer climate regions such as southeast Asia and southern Africa. 4,5 However, globally, the
largest deposits of peat are found in the northern hemisphere in boreal and Arctic peatlands, and the
composition of PM emitted from these fires is not yet well characterized. 6–8 Climate change and the
resulting increased temperatures as well as higher frequency of extreme weather events, like droughts
and thunderstorms, increase the size and frequency of wildfires also in boreal and Arctic regions. 9–11
Peatland fires, often associated with forest fires, are expected to follow this trend. 3,12
Boreal and Arctic peatlands are home to a large variety of vascular and non-vascular plants including
especially various species of sedges, shrubs, and Sphagnum mosses. Peat layers are formed by the
accumulation of incompletely decomposed plant material partially transformed into humic substances by
biodegradation. 13 With increasing depth of the peat layer, the maturation of fresh biomass increases due
to methanogenesis under anaerobic conditions, consequently forming fossilized materials by coalification.
14

Peatlands are typically affected by smoldering fires which are characterized by oxygen-deficient, slow,

flameless burning and low temperatures (up to 600 °C) by heterogenous oxidation and a lower modified
combustion efficiency (MCE; higher ratio of CO to CO2). In contrast, flaming combustion takes place at
higher temperatures (1500 °C) and involves fuel volatilization by pyrolysis with subsequent homogeneous
oxidation in the oxygen-rich gas phase with a higher MCE. 15–17

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-k8ld5 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9634-9239 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

For the chemical characterization of peat burning derived OA, PM can be collected on filter samples and
extracted for in-depth offline analysis. Targeted approaches like gas chromatography coupled to mass
spectrometry (GC-MS) are used to identify and quantify known marker compounds but miss a large
proportion of the low-volatile OC fractions. 18 To address the high complexity of combustion aerosols,
direct-infusion Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance (FT-ICR) MS enables the characterization of a
wide mass and volatility range. Its ultrahigh resolution and mass accuracy allows for the assignment of
sum formulas of compounds comprised of C, H, N, O and S. 19 Moreover, selective ionization techniques,
e.g., electrospray ionization (ESI) targeting polar compounds and atmospheric pressure photoionization
(APPI) targeting non-/low-polar species can be utilized to address a specific compositional space. 20 With
respect to the unique composition and burning conditions of boreal and Arctic peats compared to other
wildfire fuel types, FT-ICR MS have shown an extreme molecular complexity including polar nitrogen- and
sulfur-rich OA compounds that were found to be clearly different comparing boreal and Arctic peat. 21–23
The origin of the complex composition of fresh peat-derived OA could be accessed by online chemical
analysis of laboratory-scale peat smoldering elucidating formation processes of the found organic
compounds. Thermo-gravimetric analysis (TGA) provides a valuable basis to mimic combustion conditions
as measurement atmospheres (inert, oxidative) and temperature programs can be controlled. The evolved
gas mixture emitted during TGA can be further analyzed to obtain insights into the chemical composition
of evaporation, pyrolysis, or combustion processes. As an example, TGA revealed different temperature
ranges for the decomposition of remaining lignocellulosic biomass in peat that could be attributed to
cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin. 24 Evolved gas analysis (EGA) by Fourier transform infrared
spectroscopy (FTIR) and MS showed temperature-dependent differences in the evolution profiles of gases
and small organic compounds, that were also referred to lignocellulosic biomass decomposition. 25 The
application of UHRMS for evolved gas analysis revealed in-depth characterization of lignin pyrolysis
products as well as insights into wildfire-related changes in soil organic matter (SOM). 26,27

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-k8ld5 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9634-9239 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

FT-ICR MS in combination with EGA, but also with fragmentation techniques, such as infrared multiphoton
dissociation (IRMPD), allow for insights into structural motifs of macromolecules based on pyrolysis
products, 28 or fragmentation patterns, 29 respectively. Two main structural motifs can be assigned: singlecore (island) and multicore type (archipelago). The single-core motif is comprised of larger condensed
aromatic ring structures with alkylation, whereas the multicore motif is characterized by smaller
interconnected aromatic ring structures. 30 This concept was initially applied to asphaltenes in petroleum
but later transferred to OA from brown coal and biomass burning. 21,31 For OA, single-core structures are
built up during combustion from smaller aromatic structures or humic substances formed by microbial
degradation of biomass during peat maturation. 32,33 Multicore motifs are derived from lignin structures,
soil organic matter biodegradation products (humic substances) or their incomplete thermal degradation.
34

This study aims to access the complex molecular composition and structural motifs of low and non-polar
species formed during boreal and Arctic peat burning. The molecular complexity of real-world peat
combustion aerosol is addressed by direct infusion ultra-high resolution APPI-FT-ICR MS. Additional IRMPD
fragmentation experiments were applied on selected precursor compounds to access information on
prevalent core structures present in the aerosol. The analysis conception is broadened by EGA-FT-ICR MS
mimicking peat burning under oxygen-rich and inert nitrogen conditions on a small-scale laboratory basis.
Because of comparatively low temperatures and slow heating rates of the TGA, we could mimic especially
smoldering-like conditions. Oxygen-rich conditions can mimic smoldering in the upper soil layers that
contain higher oxygen concentrations, whereas inert nitrogen conditions mimic particularly smoldering or
heat-induced reactions in deeper soil layers with limited access to oxygen. Both IRMPD and EGA
experiments are able to elucidate structural molecular motifs and provide insights into the single- versus
multicore discussion of peat and peat burning aerosol. The combination of this complementary analytical

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-k8ld5 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9634-9239 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

information adds molecular knowledge on OC-rich PM emissions from peatland fires in the northern
hemisphere, increasing the understanding of their diverse climate and environmental health effects.

2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Peat sampling sites and laboratory burning experiments
A detailed description of the peat sampling sites and the laboratory burning experimental set up was given
in a previous publication. 21 Briefly, 30 cm deep peat samples (top layer) were collected at four locations
in northern Europe. Two samples were collected from Finnish Boreal peatlands (Lakkasuo: FIA, Siikaneva:
FIB) and two sample were collected from permafrost peatlands in Rogovaya (ROG; Russia) and on Svalbard
(NOR; Norway) (Table 1). At the Finnish Boreal peatland sites, samples from deeper layers (30-60 cm) were
collected additionally, for thermal analysis. All samples were stored under dark and dry conditions until
the combustion experiment. Both Finnish peat samples (FIA, FIB) were collected from ombrotrophic boreal
peatlands characterized by a vegetation dominated by Sphagnum moss cover as well as sedges, some small
shrubs and birch trees. In contrast, the samples ROG and NOR originate from the active layer of Arctic
permafrost peatlands that experience lower peat formation due to the harsher climatic conditions. The
main vegetation at the minerotrophic ROG sampling site is dominated by sedges and, to a lesser extent,
Sphagnum mosses and some shrubs. The vegetation at the Svalbard study site (NOR) is characterized as
herbaceous moss tundra.
Open peat burning was conducted at the ILMARI-laboratory of the University of Eastern Finland. 35 50 g of
each top-layer peat sample was placed in the burning stove and ignited by a heating element within the
sample. The formed exhaust gases were collected by a hood and transferred to connected on-line
instrumentation and filter sampling. Particulate matter (PM) samples were collected from the exhaust
aerosols on pre-baked quartz fiber filters (QFF, Pallflex Tissuquartz) for 12–55 min (depending on the
duration of the combustion) with a flow rate of 90 l min-1. Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR,

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-k8ld5 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9634-9239 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

DX4000, Gasmet, Finland) was used to measure carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide was measured by
an NDIR-based trace level CO2 gas analyzer (ULTRAMAT 23, Siemens, Germany) to define the start and end
point of the combustion experiment (above or below 5 ppm CO, respectively) and to calculate the
modified combustion efficiency (MCE). 17

2.2. Thermal Gravimetric Analysis and Time-resolved Ultrahigh-Resolution Mass Spectrometry
For thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA), aliquots of each peat were cryo-milled to create homogenized
samples. Few milligrams (7–22 mg) of the powder were weighted in aluminum crucibles and placed in the
thermobalance (TG 209, Netzsch Gerätebau, Selb, Germany) coupled to a modified Bruker GC-APCI II
source equipped with atmospheric pressure photoionization (APPI) by a Kr vacuum ultraviolet lamp
(10/10.6 eV, 124/117 nm) operated in positive ion mode. 36,37 The temperature gradient of the
thermobalance was programmed to start with a 2 min isothermal step at 30 °C, then a ramp to 600 °C
(10 K min-1), and a final isothermal step for 15 min at 600 °C, with a constant flow of 200 mL min-1
compressed air or nitrogen, depending on the experiment (Table 1). The evolved mixture was sampled via
a heated interface and transfer line (deactivated fused silica capillary, 0.53 mm inner diameter, 280 °C)
into the ion source of the mass spectrometer. For mass spectrometric detection, a Fourier-transform ion
cyclotron resonance mass spectrometer (FT-ICR MS; Apex II Ultra FT–MS, Bruker, Germany) was used,
equipped with a 7 T superconducting magnet. Mass spectra were recorded in the range of m/z 100–1000
with a four megaword transient, resulting in a resolving power of approx. 300,000 at m/z 400. Timeresolved broadband spectra were recorded by accumulating 10 microscans that result in an acquisition
rate of 3 summed spectra per minute. A detailed description of the combined setup can be found
elsewhere. 38

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-k8ld5 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9634-9239 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

Table 1: Overview of peat samples (top layer: 0-30cm), conditions during thermal analysis and resulting
mass loss after the temperature protocol and keeping the sample for 15 min at 600 °C.
origin
Lakkasuo
(Finland)
Siikaneva
(Finland)
Svalbard
(Norway)
Rogovaya
(Russia)

classification

sample

boreal

FIA

boreal

FIB

Arctic

NOR

Arctic

ROG

atmosphere

mass [mg]

residue [%]

mass loss [%]

nitrogen

7.37

23

77

oxidative

6.77

2

98

nitrogen

8.21

25

75

oxidative

10.05

2

98

nitrogen

9.27

59

41

oxidative

21.7

43

57

nitrogen

8.72

29

71

oxidative

12.6

5

95

2.3. Filter Extraction and Direct-infusion Ultrahigh-Resolution Mass Spectrometry
Portions of each QFF sample were extracted in cleaned glass vials with 4 ml methanol/dichloromethane
(1/1 v%, LC-MS grade) and ultra-sonication for 30 min in an ice chilled water bath. Finally, the extracts
were filtered (0.22 µm PTFE membrane, Sartorius, Goettingen, Germany) to remove any remaining
particles and stored at -25 °C until analysis. Prior to the analysis, an aliquot of 0.5 ml of each sample was
diluted with 4 ml methanol/toluene (1/1 v%).
Direct-infusion broadband APPI FT-ICR MS measurements were performed at the National High Magnetic
Field Laboratory in Tallahassee (Florida, USA) on a custom-built hybrid linear ion trap FT-ICR mass
spectrometer equipped with a 21 T superconducting magnet. 39 Time domain transients of 3.2 s were
conditionally co-added (100 scans) to achieve comparable total ion abundances. 2x106 charges were
externally accumulated and transferred to the ICR cell for analysis.

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-k8ld5 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9634-9239 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

2.4. Fragmentation: Infrared multiphoton dissociation
For infrared multiphoton dissociation (IRMPD) at the 21 T FT-ICR MS, ions of a 2 Da mass window (m/z 559561) were isolated by the external dual linear ion trap, accumulated and transferred to the ICR cell,
fragmented by irradiation for 500 ms with an IR-laser (λ = 10.6 μm, 40 W, Synrad CO2 laser, Mukilteo, USA)
inside the ICR cell and consequently detected. 29 Time domain transients of 3.2 s were conditionally coadded (200 scans) to achieve comparable total ion abundances.

2.5. Data Analysis and Sum Formula Assignment
Data analysis of direct-infusion 21 T FT-ICR MS data (broadband and fragmentation experiments) was
carried out with Predator Analysis. It was used for the processing of coadded time-domain transients,
including phasing (only broadband), Fourier-transformation, peak picking (peaks greater than six times the
baseline root-mean-square noise at m/z 400) and mass calibration, based on selected intensive Kendrick
mass series covering the whole mass range and consequent walking calibration.
For time-resolved TGA 7 T FT-ICR MS, DataAnalysis 5.1 (Bruker, Germany) was used for peak picking (S/N
of ≥6), internal calibration with intensive homologous series and export of the time-resolved data by a selfwritten Visual Basic script.
The exported mass spectra from both instruments were processed by self-written MatLab algorithms and
routines combined in a graphical user interface named CERES Processing. 40 After careful manual
investigation, the following restrictions were deployed for elemental composition assignment: CcHhNnOoSs,
where 5≤c≤100, 5≤h≤100, n≤4, o≤15, and s≤2, with a maximal error of ±0.3 ppm for direct-infusion data
or ±1 ppm for time-resolved data, allowing for the assignment of radical cations and protonated species
(M·+/[M+H]+).
FT-ICR mass spectra files and assigned elemental compositions are publicly available via the Open Science
Framework at DOI 10.17605/OSF.IO/B8FDU. 41

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-k8ld5 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9634-9239 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

2.5.1 Double bond equivalents (DBE) and Planar Aromatic Limit
Double bond equivalents (DBE) are a measure for the degree of unsaturation. It is defined as the sum of
the number of double bonds (π-bonds) and rings in a molecule and can be calculated based on the assigned
elemental composition: DBE = C-H/2-N/2+1. DBE versus carbon number plots are used to visualize complex
datasets and emphasize changes in the degree of unsaturation in combination with the size (carbon
number) of molecules. The planar limit, defined as the line generated by connecting the maximum DBE
values of given carbon numbers based on the maximum valence of carbon, can be applied to assign
structural building blocks of compounds. 42

3. Results and Discussion
3.1. Extractable Low-polar Species in Boreal and Arctic Peat Burning PM
The laboratory-based burning of the two Boreal and two Arctic peat samples is dominated by smoldering
combustion, indicated by low to medium MCE values during the burning phase (MCE = 0.82–0.92, Table
S1), producing high amounts of OC-rich PM because of incomplete thermal peat degradation. PM extracts
of those samples are characterized by (+)APPI 21 T FT-ICR MS analyses and reveal a complex mixture of
non- and low-polar organic constituents (Figure 1a), mostly assigned to the CHO, CH, CHNO and sulfurcontaining compound classes in the range of m/z 180–600. The average DBE (8.63–9.43) and AImod (0.39–
0.43) values are consistently high, indicating a strong abundance of molecules that contain aromatic ring
structures (Figure 1b, Figure S3). However, in general, all four peat combustion extracts are vastly similar,
both regarding the detected elemental compositions (70–87 % common compounds, Figure S1) as well as
their intensity distribution in the mass spectra (Figure S2), even though APPI is reported to be less prone
to matrix effects. 20 This result contrasts with observations made for the polar organic fraction of these
aerosol extracts investigated in a previous study by ESI 21 T FT-ICR MS, that revealed distinct differences
between the boreal and Arctic peat burning aerosols in all compound classes. 21 With regard to Figure 1,

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-k8ld5 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9634-9239 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

the CHO class is the most abundant compound class (approx. 50-54% int.) with molecules containing up
to 10 oxygen atoms, but predominantly with small oxygen numbers (average #O: 1.8–2.0), resulting in low
intensity weighted average O/C ratios of 0.14–0.16, which is lower than would be expected for, e.g., lignin
(Table S2, Table S3). 38 The DBE versus carbon number plot (Figure 1b) shows broad coverage of the
compositional space, indicating condensed aromatic structures, close to the planar aromatic limit, 43 as
well as less aromatic structures with more alkylation. CHO compounds originate during combustion from
the incomplete thermal degradation of the main plant building structures cellulose, hemicellulose and
lignin, which are all found, partially degraded, in the peat before combustion and may undergo further
oxidation during the combustion process. 44–46
The second most abundant compound class in the organic aerosol (OA) of peat burning is the CH class,
followed by the CHS class, with both also covering the whole detected mass range. The CH class is
dominated by condensed aromatic compounds (Figure 1b) but also species with lower aromaticity and
higher alkylation were detected. Hydrocarbons are a known product from combustion processes and are
therefore also expected for the smoldering combustion of peat, e.g., in the form of PAHs or alkanes, which
were often particularly abundant in peat burning emissions. 47,48 The low temperature smoldering
conditions are also the reason for the observation of more alkylated hydrocarbon and PAH species, that
would not be formed by e.g., high temperature flaming combustion. 49
The CHS class shows abundant signals in the high DBE range (Figure 1b), indicating the formation of sulfurcontaining condensed PAHs (e.g., Benzothiophenes) during peat burning. A dimeric or trimeric pattern of
the main intensity distribution is observed, with maxima at DBE = 6, 9 and 12 (CHS1) and DBE= 8 and 11
(CHS2). CHS compounds have been rarely detected in primary emissions from biomass burning, as the
amount of sulfur is low in most types of fresh biomasses. 50 Peat seems to be an exception to this, as the
number of detected CHS as well as CHOS compounds is high in all samples. The reason for the high
abundance of sulfur-containing species in peat smoldering organic aerosol could be the ability of

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-k8ld5 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9634-9239 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

Sphagnum mosses to efficiently fixate sulfur as well as the microbial activity during the formation of peat
under oxygen-depleted conditions, especially from sulfur-reducing microorganisms. The organosulfur
species are therefore likely already present in the partially maturated peat before being volatilized during
combustion. Additionally, the ionization by APPI is very sensitive for sulfur-containing species, which may
result in an overrepresentation of these species. 51 The herein discussed results are in line with our
previous study, that revealed an unusually high abundance of sulfur-containing species (CHOS, CHNOS) in
the polar fraction of the same peat combustion emission extracts. 21
Nitrogen-containing species are found to be oxidized (CHNO) or reduced species (CHN) with high
aromaticity in all samples, but with higher relative intensity in the two Arctic peat samples. Smoldering
combustion is known to emit nitrogen-containing compounds from the low-temperature, oxygendepleted combustion of biomass, and especially peat was found to emit high concentrations of e.g.,
pyridine-like compounds, which would fit the observed distribution in the DBE versus carbon number plot
(Figure 1b). 52 The overall number and intensity of nitrogen-containing compounds is low compared to the
other classes, which may partially be explained by their lower ionization efficiency in APPI. 53,54

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-k8ld5 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9634-9239 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

Figure 1: a) Mass spectrum of assigned elemental compositions for an exemplary peat PM extract sample
(FIA) measured by direct-infusion 21T APPI FT-ICR MS. The compound class of each formula is indicated by
its color and the relative intensity compound class distribution is indicated by the inserted pie chart. b)
Contour plots of double bond equivalents (DBE) versus carbon number summarized into four major
compound classes (CH, CHOX, CHNyOx and CHSz) for the exemplary peat PM extract sample FIA measured
by 21 T APPI FT-ICR MS. Reference lines for fullerene-like hydrocarbons (black, DBE= 0.9 x C), catacondensed PAHs (pink, DBE= 0.75 x C -0.5) and linear polyenes (orange, CxHx+2) are indicated by dotted
lines. The planar limit of each compound class is calculated by a linear regression and the slope a is
indicated by a red dotted line.

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-k8ld5 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9634-9239 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

Although the non- and low-polar OA fractions of boreal and Arctic peat reveal high similarity with respect
to compound occurrence and abundance pattern, they are still of relevance regarding the differentiation
to other emission sources due to the observed nitrogen- and sulfur-containing compounds. While the
polar organic fraction was found to contain highly oxygenated CHO, CHNO, CHOS and CHNOS species, 21
the low polar fraction analyzed in this study contains most of these compound classes, but more uniformly
regarding the different peat samples, as well as less oxygen and higher abundancies of the reduced
compound classes CH, CHN and CHS. However, there are some differences between peat samples,
observed in the low intensity region of the mass spectra, showing variances between the two origin regions
of the peat samples (Boreal/Arctic). A number of common compounds from all compound classes is
observed for the two Boreal peat samples (FIA + FIB: 1407) as well as several non- or low oxygenated
nitrogen-containing compounds for the two Arctic peat samples (NOR + ROG: 416, unique NOR: 304,
unique ROG: 523) (Figure S1). The origin of peat is therefore still a relevant factor that influences the
chemical composition of the emitted organic aerosol, also regarding the low polar fraction of OC.
All detected compound classes show their center of intensity in the DBE versus carbon number plots close
to the planar limit, with some also further extending to higher carbon numbers and lower DBEs. While
compounds close to the planar limit can commonly be described as single-core compounds (island-type:
large, condensed ring with low alkylation), compounds with lower DBE values and higher carbon numbers
can be described as multicore compounds (archipelago-type: smaller aromatic rings connected by alkylbridges). 28,30 Both structural motifs are observed in all samples, with higher intensity of the single-core
motif in most compound classes (Figure 1b, Figure S3).

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-k8ld5 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9634-9239 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

3.1.1.

Isolation and Fragmentation: IRMPD

Broadband mass spectrometric information gives limited access to structural information. However, the
molecular structure determines the environmental, climate and health properties of the OA. For a deeper
analysis of structural motifs in peat smoldering aerosol, extending beyond the interpretation of regions in
the broadband DBE versus carbon number plots, isolation, and fragmentation of selected precursor
masses by IRMPD is conducted (Figure 2a). The high chemical complexity does not allow for the external
isolation of single compounds from direct-infusion experiments, but the isolation of 2 Da mass windows is
feasible. The selected precursor mass range (m/z 559–561) is on the upper end of the observed mass
range, but extended ion accumulation times enable the accumulation of a sufficient number of ions for
fragmentation. The fragment spectrum, therefore, represents a combination of fragments from an
average of multiple hundred precursor ions and their corresponding molecular structures. This method
has already been applied for the fragmentation and characterization of extremely complex petroleum
samples. 55 The energy transfer in IRMPD occurs through the absorption of infrared radiation, exciting
molecules into more energetic vibrational states, similar to a heating process causing thermal degradation.
56

The precursor region comprising the intact molecular ions is mainly comprised of CHO, CHNO as well as
some CHN and CH compounds, representatively mimicking the overall class composition described above
(Figure S4). However, the resulting fragment spectrum shows an entirely different compound class
distribution, with high abundances of CH and CHN species in the lower mass range (m/z 150–250). The
corresponding DBE versus carbon number plots (Figure 2b) of the fragment ions separated by compound
class reveals a narrow main region that is elliptically shaped and extends from DBE=4 (one ring) along the
planar aromatic limit to DBE=30 (five rings or larger). 57 Compounds in this region can be described as
condensed aromatic structures with a low degree of alkylation. These fragment species originate from
archipelago-type precursor structures and are formed by the cleavage of bonds connecting the individual

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-k8ld5 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9634-9239 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

condensed aromatic rings (2–6 membered rings), resulting in a diagonal shift from the precursor region to
the bottom left of the DBE plots. The observation of condensed aromatic CHO, CHN, and CHNO compounds
in the fragment spectrum indicates that the location of the heteroelements in these compounds is either
inside the ring system or directly attached to the ring system, but not at the sidechains. In addition to the
described main distribution, compounds with lower intensity are detected at high carbon numbers (#C>35)
in the CHO, CHN, and CHNO classes, shifted horizontally from the precursor region. These compounds are
fragments from the dealkylation of single-core (island) precursor ions, as they only decrease in carbon
number but not DBE, leaving the ring structure intact. Only a few of these species are observed, indicating
a minor contribution of single-core motif compounds. Fragmentation by IRMPD, therefore, mainly cleaves
condensed aromatic fragments from the precursor molecules, allowing the characterization of the core
structures that form the precursor molecules.
In the APPI broadband spectrum, the single-core motif region shows the highest intensity, and it was also
dominating in most of the spectra analyzed by ESI 21 T FT-ICR MS in a previous study,21 but only a minor
contribution of the expected dealkylation products is observed by IRMPD at m/z 558–561. This observation
could be explained by the selected mass region, which is at the upper end of the detected mass range and
may, therefore, not address single-core species that are more frequently observed in the lower mass
range. We hypothesize on different structural motifs along the molecular weight distribution of the peat
OA, because of the incomplete thermal degradation of peat constituents. It is possible that the observed
aromatic core structures are formed more efficiently through fragmentation by IRMPD. 30,55

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-k8ld5 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9634-9239 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

Figure 2: a) Mass spectra of assigned fragments (left) and zoom in on a section of precursor ions (right) in
PM-extracts from the exemplarily combustion of peat FIB by infrared multiphoton dissociation (IRMPD) of
an isolated precursor mass range (m/z 559–561) by APPI 21T FT-ICR MS. The compound class of each peak
is indicated by its color. The red arrow indicates the typical pattern of multicore precursor fragmentation.
b) Contour double bond equivalent (DBE) versus carbon number plots of the compound classes detected
by IRMPD fragmentation of FIB. Reference lines for fullerene-like hydrocarbons (black, DBE= 0.9 x C), catacondensed PAHs (pink, DBE= 0.75 x C -0.5) and linear polyenes (orange, CxHx+2) are indicated by dotted
lines.

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-k8ld5 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9634-9239 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

3.2. Thermal analysis APPI-FT-ICR MS of Boreal and Arctic peat
The origin and formation of organic aerosol compounds emitted from peat combustion can be further
investigated by miniature-scale laboratory-based evolved gas analysis FT-ICR MS. Smoldering combustion
conditions were aimed to be mimicked by TGA using inert nitrogen and oxidative atmosphere. The typical
temperature of smoldering fires in peat ranges between 250–350 °C with peak temperatures of 600 °C,
whereas flaming combustion occurs at peak temperatures of 1500 °C. 58 With the applied TGA setup,
especially smoldering conditions can be simulated as the burning temperatures and propagation rates are
comparatively low. Flaming combustion occurs at temperatures beyond the possibilities of our
instrumentation. Therefore, the herein applied oxidative conditions more reflect smoldering fires in the
upper peat layer in which oxygen concentration is still high, whereas inert nitrogen conditions can give
insights into thermally induced reactions under poor oxygen conditions in deeper soil layers.
Figure 3a) shows the mass loss for all four peat samples under nitrogen and oxidative conditions with
additional information on the exact mass loss values and residue content given in Table 1. Generally,
oxidative conditions reveal higher mass losses than smoldering conditions that can be explained by more
efficient combustion of the peat, whereas during oxygen-depleted smoldering, thermally induced
condensation and aromatization reactions lead to the formation of coke residue. 32,59 NOR has in general
higher TGA residues because of its higher mineral content. The sampling location of NOR is in the high
arctic areas covered by ice or tundra with short vegetation. 60 Short and inefficient growing seasons lead
to comparatively low peat formation that is why deposition of mineral soil has higher impact on the peat
composition of NOR than for the other samples.
Regardless of the applied measurement atmosphere, all peat samples reveal a similar mass loss step
between 30 to 100 °C that can be attributed to the evaporation of residual water. 25 At an onset
temperature of approximately 200–250 °C, thermal decomposition and combustion of the organic
material starts. Under oxidative conditions, combustion leads to an abrupt mass loss with a sharp DTG

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-k8ld5 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9634-9239 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

signal (Figure S5). The main mass loss occurs below 300 °C, where most organic peat components undergo
combustion. 24 However, there is a second mass loss step at 400 °C especially pronounced for FIA, but also
present for the other peat samples. This second mass loss step might be attributed to peat compounds
with a more stable carbon skeleton requiring higher temperatures for combustion. Those species might
be humic substances, a broad group of larger soil organic compounds formed by microbial degradation of
lignocellulosic biomass, which is characterized by functionalized, bridged and also higher aromatic
molecular structures. 13,61 33,62 Therefore, we assume that the second mass loss step observed under
oxidative combustion conditions could result from the combustion of larger aromatic structures of humic
substances with higher humification degree. The idea of increased microbial matured compounds is
further supported by the TGA data of the same peat sampled in greater depth as shown in Figure S6 (Table
S5). Especially FIB sampled at 30–60 cm shows a pronounced second pyrolysis step at 400 °C compared to
the less matured FIB sampled at 0–30 cm peat depth. Literature results also contribute to this hypothesis:
humic substances extracted from forest-tundra peat reveal an increased aromatic content and, therefore,
humification degree, with increasing depth of the peat layer. 34
Under inert nitrogen conditions, the mass loss occurs over a broad temperature range of 200–500 °C and
different pyrolysis features are highlighted in the DTG signal (Figure S5). Despite the water loss, there are
three additional mass loss steps with maximum mass changes at 270 °C and 320 °C as well as a broader
mass loss step between 380 °C to 500 °C. Peat is composed of partially degraded lignocellulosic biomass
as well as its degradation products. 63 As we investigated the upper peat layer (0–30 cm) and consider the
unfavorable degradation conditions especially in permafrost soil, these mass loss steps might be mainly
attributed to hemicellulose, cellulose, and lignin. In literature, pyrolysis was observed for hemicellulose at
220–315 °C, for cellulose at 315–400 °C, and for lignin at a wider temperature range between 160 to 900
°C with most of the mass loss occurring at higher temperatures (400–550 °C). 25,64 Our TGA results on peat
decomposition with inert and oxidative atmosphere especially fit these of Chen et al. studying Chinese
forest peat. 24

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-k8ld5 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9634-9239 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

Figure 3: a) Mass loss curves of the four peat samples (FIA: magenta, FIB: green, ROG: yellow and NOR:
blue) acquired by thermal analysis with oxidative (dashed line) or nitrogen (filled line) atmosphere. b)
Temperature-resolved mass spectra of thermal analysis coupled to APPI FT-ICR MS of peat sample FIA
measured under nitrogen (top) or oxidative (bottom) atmosphere.

Online-evolved gas analysis by high-resolution mass spectrometry provides additional information on the
temperature-resolved chemical fingerprint of the different peat samples. In Figure 3b) and Figure S7,
temperature-resolved mass spectra are shown for oxygen-depleted and oxygen-rich smoldering
conditions. Summed mass spectra over the whole temperature range are given in Figure S8. In agreement
with the before discussed TGA results, volatilized compounds are detected over a broad temperature
range from 200–500 °C for inert nitrogen atmosphere, whereas for oxidative conditions, the temperature
range is narrower (200–350 °C). In accordance with literature on biomass pyrolysis, 38,64,65 inert nitrogen
conditions reveal a pronounced bimodal m/z distribution: The first m/z distribution is found for m/z 380–
500 with an intensity maximum between 200 to 350 °C, that might correspond to the pyrolysis of

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-k8ld5 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9634-9239 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

hemicellulose and cellulose. The second m/z distribution is located at m/z 200–350, with an intensity
maximum between 400 to 550 °C, but starting, however, already at 200 °C. This second distribution is
potentially produced by the pyrolysis of the lignin macrostructure cracked into smaller, oxygenated
aromatics.
In Figure 4 and Figure S8, relative compound class distributions are given for the peat samples investigated
under smoldering and oxidative conditions (intensity values normalized to the sample weight in Table S4).
The samples FIA and ROG serve as examples for boreal and arctic peat, respectively. Absolute compound
class distribution is shown in Figure S9. In general, the herein investigated peat from boreal regions reveals
higher contents in oxygen-containing compounds, whereas the arctic peat is enriched in CH-class and
nitrogen-containing compounds (N-, NO-class). These findings are in congruence with observations made
for the laboratory-based peat combustion aerosol discussed above and ESI-FT-ICR MS results from a
previous study. 21 Comparing both combustion conditions, oxygen-depleted smoldering releases an
increased number of nitrogen-containing compounds. This effect is literature-known, and the presence of
amides, nitriles, and N-heterocycles is related to reactions with increased concentration of ammonia
during smoldering as well as the pyrolysis of biopolymers. 66,67 For peat smoldering, especially the release
of pyridines was observed. 52
It must be noted that EGA-FT-ICR MS did not detect any sulfur-containing compounds, although these
compound classes sum up to one quarter of the relative intensity of the aerosol extracts discussed above.
An explanation of this discrepancy might be the extraction process itself and, therefore, the enrichment
of non- to semipolar compounds or the application of a dopant for the direct infusion analysis as well as
the higher sensitivity, mass resolution and charge capacity of the 21 T FT-ICR MS system.
DBE/#C diagrams (Figure 4, Figure S10 & S11) add deeper insights on the molecular fingerprint of peat
combustion products. Both combustion conditions reveal a bimodal DBE/#C distribution that is more
pronounced for inert nitrogen conditions. The CH-class shows, regardless of the peat origin and for both

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-k8ld5 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9634-9239 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

combustion conditions, an intensity maximum at 27–31 carbons and DBE values between 6–10. In
literature, a variety of different organic compounds were identified in peat that includes n-alkanes, fatty
acids, alcohols, squalene, but also cyclic compounds such as di- and triterpenoids or steroids. 68,69 However,
the here observed DBE/#C range fit especially squalene (C30H50, DBE 6) and its derivatives or sterane-based
biomarkers, which can also be ionized by APPI. 54
The oxygen-containing classes reveal the most remarkable bimodal distribution in the DBE/#C diagram
with a first distribution at 10–20 carbons and a second distribution at 25–30 carbons. In contrast to
oxidative conditions, the occurrence of both distributions is related to temperature for inert nitrogen
conditions. In Figure S12, evolution profiles of the oxygen-containing classes are shown for both
combustion conditions. The O1–O4-classes reveal a first intensity maximum at temperatures between
200–350 °C and a second at 350–500 °C. At the first maximum, compounds with 27–31 carbons and DBE
values between 4-10 were detected, that is in the same range as found for CH-class compounds. Although
the temperature range of the first maximum is those of the decomposition of hemicellulose and cellulose,
the detected sum formulae do not fit their expected pyrolysis products. Therefore, we assume that these
detected compounds correspond to terpenoids, steroids or other cyclic organic species released during
cellulose/hemicellulose pyrolysis. Similar can be assumed for higher oxygen classes occurring in that
temperature range. At the second intensity maximum of the bimodal distribution, mainly O1–O4-class
compounds with 10–25 carbons and DBE values between 4-15 were detected. These compounds are most
likely oxygenated aromatics with low alkylation partially produced during the thermal decomposition of
the lignin macrostructure. However, there is indication that also other macromolecular structures, like
humic substances, contribute to this decomposition phase. The oxygen-containing pyrolysis products
reveal a continuous compositional space without distinct evidence for the formation of dimers or trimers
as it would be expected from the lignin macrostructure. It is therefore believed that also pyrolysis products
of humic substances contribute to this phase.

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-k8ld5 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9634-9239 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

As mentioned before, under inert nitrogen atmosphere, an increased number of nitrogen-containing
species is detected compared to oxidative conditions. Both arctic and boreal peat reveal NO-compounds
with 5–15 DBEs and relatively low carbon numbers of 10 to 20. The detected nitrogen-containing
compounds seem to be mostly aromatic with relatively low alkylation. This finding indicates that nitrogen
is mainly incorporated in aromatic rings rather than attached to alkyl side chains. Interestingly, also the
nitrogen-containing compounds reveal a temperature dependance under inert nitrogen conditions (Figure
S13). N1Ox-compounds show a bimodal behavior with a first intensity maximum between 200–300 °C that
could result from the thermal decomposition of more labile compounds. The second intensity maximum
appears between 400 and 500 °C and could be attributed to the pyrolysis of N-containing macromolecules.
Remarkably, nitrogen-containing compounds with two to three nitrogen atoms mostly occur at
temperatures between 300–400 °C, that also suggests the decomposition of macromolecular structures.
The comparison of the evolved gas emissions from both boreal and arctic peat indicates that the molecular
composition of peat originating from different climatic regions has influence on the emitted compounds
and, thus, also on the composition of real-world wildfire aerosols. The main differences are observed for
oxygen- and nitrogen-containing compounds. Nitrogen-containing compounds are in general enriched in
arctic peats (ROG, NOR); however, the structural motifs of emitted pyrolysis products are similar between
both peat types. This is different for oxygen-containing compounds: the two investigated boreal peats (FIA,
FIB) are clearly enriched in little alkylated, aromatic pyrolysis products that may originate from an
increased content of lignin and/or humic substances in the peat organic matter. An increased content of
lignin could be explained by the vegetation found at the boreal sampling sites compared to the arctic
samples. The boreal peat sampling sites FIA/FIB were dominated by sphagnum mosses, sedges, some
dwarf shrubs and birch trees, whereas the arctic sampling site ROG is characterized by dominating sedges
and, to a lesser extent, sphagnum mosses and dwarf shrubs. 21 As the boreal peatlands are enriched in
dwarf shrubs and birch trees, those plants seem to increase the lignin content in peat. Furthermore, an
increased content of humic substances in boreal peat could be explained by a higher level of humification

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-k8ld5 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9634-9239 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

caused by a higher microbial activity compared to permafrost artic peat. Therefore, it is likely that a
combination of both factors leads to the increased detection of small single-core pyrolysis products.
However, as peat is a highly variable matrix, further investigations are needed to verify these assumptions.
With respect to real world peat fire emissions, small-scale laboratory-based peat combustion with TGAFT-ICR MS can add insights into thermally induced reactions. Our results nicely fit the observations of
Solihat et al., 70 who investigated the influence of peat burning on soil organic matter. The authors found
an increase in compounds of smaller O-classes, the CH-class, and N-classes which is also indicated by our
data. Furthermore, the authors investigated the onset temperature for the formation of smaller oxygencontaining compounds, that was determined to be between 300–400 °C. Also, this finding agrees with the
results found for peat burning by TGA-FT-ICR MS, as we found the presence of lignin- or humic-like
pyrolysis products in this temperature range typical for smoldering fires.

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-k8ld5 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9634-9239 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

Figure 4: Contour plots of double bond equivalents (DBE) versus carbon number (#C) measured by TGAFT-ICR MS for an example of boreal peat (FIA) and arctic peat (ROG). The contour plots are summed up
over the whole temperature range (50-600 °C) and grouped into the three major compound classes (CH,
CHOX, CHNyOx). All peat samples were investigated und a) inert nitrogen atmosphere and b) oxidative
atmosphere. The relative compound class distribution for each sample is given as pie chart. Reference lines
for fullerene-like hydrocarbons (black, DBE= 0.9 x C), cata-condensed PAHs (pink, DBE= 0.75 x C -0.5) and
linear polyenes (orange, CxHx+2) are indicated by dotted lines.

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-k8ld5 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9634-9239 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

3.3. Comparison of laboratory-scale peat burning and TGA experiments regarding chemical
composition and structural motifs.
Laboratory-scale peat burning aerosol PM extracts reveal a significantly higher total number of detected
compounds compared to the TGA experiments of the corresponding peat samples (Figure 5). This effect is
to some extent caused by the higher dynamic range, ion capacity and scan accumulation of the direct
infusion 21 T FT-ICR MS measurements used for the PM extract investigation and that leads to an increased
detection of low intensity compounds. However, considering not only the number of common elemental
compositions but also their intensity, 20–39% respectively 13–29% of the PM extract signal intensity can
be assigned to compounds that are likewise detected in the TGA experiments under nitrogen or oxidative
atmosphere of the same peat sample (Figure 5a).
Concerning only the number of detected elemental compositions, PM extracts and TGA under nitrogen
atmosphere share the highest overlap, whereas the overlap with TGA under oxidative atmosphere is the
lowest for all samples. With regard to the chemical composition, compounds common for all datasets are
comprised of the CH and CHO class. Compounds uniquely shared by TGA with oxidative atmosphere and
PM extracts are solely of the CHO class (Figure S14). In contrast, compounds shared by TGA under nitrogen
atmosphere and PM extracts are comprised of CH, CHO, CHNO and CHN species, which fits, concerning
also the higher number and intensity of the shared compounds, to the predominant smoldering
combustion conditions. 52,66 Sulfur-containing classes were solely detected for PM extracts and were not
found in the TGA experiments.
Although the number of compounds assigned to a specific emission scenario is low compared to the overall
number of detected compounds in the PM extract, they represent a substantial fraction of the signal
intensity and are therefore also likely emitted in relevant concentrations during real peat fire events.
However, a large portion of signals found in the PM extracts is missed by the TGA mimicking, which shows

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-k8ld5 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9634-9239 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

that TGA may explain only a limited fraction but does not fully reassemble the real-world combustion
conditions, as these processes are much more complex.

Figure 5: a) Relative intensity of compounds that are detected both during thermal analysis (TGA) with a
nitrogen (blue) or oxidative (orange) atmosphere and the corresponding PM extract dataset. b) Venn
diagrams of the intersect of elemental compositions detected by TGA with oxidative atmosphere, nitrogen
atmosphere or by direct infusion (DI, yellow) of the combustion PM extracts.

Besides comparing the chemical composition of the peat burning aerosol PM extracts and the evolved gas
analysis during the TGA of peat under oxygen/nitrogen atmosphere, also the molecular structural motifs
of the emitted compounds were investigated in this study. The two main structural motifs (single-core and
multicore) are observed for compounds from all three experiments, however, with different intensity. In
Figure 6a, DBE/#C contour plots overlaid for all compound classes are shown with the single-core region
marked in red and the multicore region marked in black. Especially TGA experiments under pyrolysis
(nitrogen) conditions reveal two distinct regions in the DBE/#C diagram that match the expected regions

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-k8ld5 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9634-9239 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

of both molecular structure types. This trend is less apparent in the data from TGA under oxidative
atmosphere indicating a more extensive breakdown of the biomass during oxygen-rich combustion. The
direct infusion data of the PM extracts reveal a highly pronounced single-core region, which might be
explained by ionization effects of APPI. In literature, it was shown for asphaltenes, that APPI via directinfusion may favor the ionization of single-core-type compounds in comparison to APPI via a gaseous
sample inlet. 28,55
Despite intensity differences in the structural motif regions, a similar trend for the oxygen classes O0 to O8
is observed in the single-core region for all datasets (Figure 6b). With the increasing number of oxygen
atoms in a molecule, the relative portion of compounds observed in the single-core region increases from
below 10% up to 100% (for TGA data). The same trend is also observed for the direct-infusion data of the
PM extracts, but to a lower extent due to a higher number of compounds outside the single-core or
multicore region. The boundaries for the population of the structural motifs are given in Table S6 and are
based on the observed distribution in the TGA-FT-ICR MS data. It should be mentioned that this is a
theoretical and simplified approach, as the natural distribution is a fluent transition of the two motifs.
Furthermore, the concept was primarily considered for asphaltene research, 30 but is far from understood
for other fields. Peat combustion emissions show a less distinct difference of the so-called island (singlecore) and archipelago (multicore) motifs, that are observed in the petroleum derived asphaltenes,
especially in data derived from the TGA-FT-ICR MS measurements.
Nonetheless, the structural dependence on the number of oxygen atoms allows for an indication of the
formation processes of the respective compounds. Non to low oxygenated compounds (O<4) seem to be
continuously formed up to high temperatures of 600 °C as suggested by TGA under pyrolysis conditions
(Figure S12), whereas higher oxygen classes are formed at lower temperatures. This effect was also
previously reported for other types of biomasses. 37,38 The unique composition of peat, containing partially
degraded cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin, may contribute to this stepwise formation behavior. At

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-k8ld5 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9634-9239 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

lower temperatures, mainly cellulose and hemicellulose structures are thermally degraded, emitting
compounds with more oxygen atoms and low alkylation. In contrast, lignin and humic-like structures are
mainly degraded at higher temperatures (>420 °C), resulting in the emission of less oxygenated species.

Figure 6: a) Double bond equivalent (DBE) versus carbon number (#C) contour plots of all elemental
compositions detected by APPI FT-ICR MS for the peat sample FIA from direct-infusion of the PM extract
(yellow) and thermal analysis (average over the whole temperature range) with nitrogen (blue) or air
(orange) atmosphere. The DBE/#C region for the single-core structural motif is highlighted in red, whereas
the multicore region is marked in black. b) Relative intensity of compounds detected inside the single-core
region in dependence of the number of oxygen atoms.

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-k8ld5 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9634-9239 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

4. Conclusion
Non- and low-polar organic aerosol species emitted from boreal and Arctic peat burning were analyzed by
combining laboratory-scale combustion experiments with miniature-scale simulation of the combustion
process. Organic aerosol extracts and evolved gas emissions were characterized on the molecular level
using state-of-the-art 21 T FT-ICR MS and TGA coupled to 7 T FT-ICR MS, respectively.
The organic aerosol extracts are vastly similar for all studied peat samples and are comprised of a complex
mixture of partially oxygenated, highly aromatic compounds. The additional detection of nitrogen- and
sulfur-containing compounds is a result of the predominant smoldering combustion of peat in combination
with the unique formation process and composition of peat. Based on the assigned elemental compositions
and calculated molecular properties, two main structural motifs, the single-core and the multicore
structural motif, were observed for all compound classes. Fragmentation by IRMPD of an isolated mass
range was applied for the identification of these molecular building blocks in the organic aerosol extract,
revealing the formation of heterocyclic aromatic core structures from the fragmentation of precursor
molecules that can be assigned to the multicore structural motif.
Thermal analysis of the peat samples under nitrogen-atmosphere simulating thermal decomposition
reactions in smoldering wildfires revealed three mass loss steps in the range of 200–500 °C that are
assigned to the degradation of hemicellulose, cellulose, and lignin/humic substances. Simultaneous
evolved gas analysis revealed a bimodal distribution in the mass spectrometric data, that are a result of
the thermal degradation of hemicellulose and cellulose at lower temperatures, and lignin/humic
substances at higher temperatures. Especially the pyrolysis products of the latter revealed interesting
insights: In comparison to Arctic peats, the investigated boreal peats are enriched in small single-core
pyrolysis products possibly produced by the decomposition of macromolecules like lignin or humic
substances. However, as peat is highly variable in its composition, further studies are needed to verify
those observations.

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-k8ld5 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9634-9239 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

The comparison of organic aerosol extracts to the two thermal analysis conditions revealed a higher
overlap of shared compounds with TGA under smoldering conditions and a lower overlap for oxidative
conditions, which is in good agreement with the observed burning conditions. Furthermore, a similar
structural dependency of single-core oxygenated species was observed for all three experimental datasets.
Those observations might help to elucidate the formation processes of organic aerosol constituents
emitted by the smoldering burning of peat.
The in-depth characterization of the chemical composition of peat burning organic aerosol and its
structural motifs as well as their formation in different laboratory-based experiments is an important
contribution to increase the understanding of the properties and effects induced by the emissions of real
peatland fire emissions. More frequently occurring boreal and Arctic peatland fires can emit PM to the
vulnerable Arctic ecosystem, further increasing the climate change in this region due to the potentially
strong impact on the snow albedo by the detected structural motifs. Nonetheless, the small-scale
laboratory-based approach is limited in simulating the complex organic aerosol formation mechanisms,
which points out the need for further research on real combustion facilities and field studies.

Supporting information.
Tables: combustion conditions, intensity weighted sum parameters, compound class number and intensity
distribution, thermal analysis mass loss, coordinates of DBE vs. #C regions.
Figures: Upset plot comparison PM extracts, mass spectra with compound class distribution of PM
extracts, contour DBE vs. #C plots of PM extracts and IRMPD precursor region, DTG curves, mass loss curve
comparison of peat layers, time-resolved survey plots of TGA-FT-ICR MS, mass spectra with compound
class distribution of TGA-EGA, compound class distribution of peat TGA-FT-ICR MS, contour DBE vs. #C

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-k8ld5 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9634-9239 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

plots of TGA-FT-ICR MS, temperature resolved compound class trends, upset plot comparison of TGA and
PM extract data.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG) under grant ZI 764/24-1 and the
Research Council of Finland (grant 341597). A portion of the work was performed at the National High
Magnetic Field Laboratory ICR User Facility, which is supported by the National Science Foundation
Division of Chemistry and Division of Material Research through DMR-1644779 and the State of Florida.
H.C. acknowledges funding from the Helmholtz Association (HGF) by the Helmholtz International
Laboratory aeroHEALTH (InterLabs-0005). The authors thank the DFG for funding the Bruker FT-ICR MS
(INST 264/56). M. M. R. acknowledges support received from Arctic Avenue and the Research Council of
Finland projects 355871 and 341271.

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-k8ld5 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9634-9239 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

Author Contributions
E. S.: Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Visualization, Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review
& Editing; A. N.: Investigation, Writing - Original Draft, Visualization, Writing - Review & Editing; C. P. R.:
Methodology, Software, Resources, Writing - Review & Editing, Supervision, Project administration; M. L.
C. P.: Investigation, Recourses, Review & Editing; M. S.: Investigation, Data Curation; M. M. R.:
Conceptualization, Investigation, Review & Editing; M. I.: Investigation, Review & Editing; K. K.:
Conceptualization, Investigation, Writing - Review & Editing; O. S.: Conceptualization, Investigation,
Review & Editing, Supervision, Resources, Funding acquisition; H.C.: Conceptualization, Writing - Review
& Editing, Supervision, Project administration; R.Z.: Resources, Writing - Review & Editing, Funding
acquisition

References
(1) Grant, E.; Runkle, J. D. Long-term health effects of wildfire exposure: A scoping review. The Journal of
Climate Change and Health 2022, 6, 100110.
(2) Hinwood, A. L.; Rodriguez, C. M. Potential health impacts associated with peat smoke:. Journal of the
Royal Society of Western Australia 2005, 133–138.
(3) Turetsky, M. R.; Benscoter, B.; Page, S.; Rein, G.; van der Werf, G. R.; Watts, A. Global vulnerability of
peatlands to fire and carbon loss. Nature Geosci 2015, 8 (1), 11–14.
(4) Lourenco, M.; Woodborne, S.; Fitchett, J. M. Fire regime of peatlands in the Angolan Highlands.
Environ. Monit. Assess. 2022, 195 (1), 78.
(5) Yokelson, R. J.; Saharjo, B. H.; Stockwell, C. E.; Putra, E. I.; Jayarathne, T.; Akbar, A.; Albar, I.; Blake, D.
R.; Graham, L. L. B.; Kurniawan, A.; Meinardi, S.; Ningrum, D.; Nurhayati, A. D.; Saad, A.; Sakuntaladewi,
N.; Setianto, E.; Simpson, I. J.; Stone, E. A.; Sutikno, S.; Thomas, A.; Ryan, K. C.; Cochrane, M. A. Tropical
peat fire emissions: 2019 field measurements in Sumatra and Borneo and synthesis with previous
studies. Atmos. Chem. Phys. 2022, 22 (15), 10173–10194.
(6) Melton, J. R.; Wania, R.; Hodson, E. L.; Poulter, B.; Ringeval, B.; Spahni, R.; Bohn, T.; Avis, C. A.;
Beerling, D. J.; Chen, G.; Eliseev, A. V.; Denisov, S. N.; Hopcroft, P. O.; Lettenmaier, D. P.; Riley, W. J.;
Singarayer, J. S.; Subin, Z. M.; Tian, H.; Zürcher, S.; Brovkin, V.; van Bodegom, P. M.; Kleinen, T.; Yu, Z. C.;
Kaplan, J. O. Present state of global wetland extent and wetland methane modelling: conclusions from a
model inter-comparison project (WETCHIMP). Biogeosciences 2013, 10 (2), 753–788.
(7) Xu, J.; Morris, P. J.; Liu, J.; Holden, J. PEATMAP: Refining estimates of global peatland distribution
based on a meta-analysis. CATENA 2018, 160, 134–140.
(8) Poulter, B.; Christensen, N. L.; Halpin, P. N. Carbon emissions from a temperate peat fire and its
relevance to interannual variability of trace atmospheric greenhouse gases. J. Geophys. Res. 2006, 111
(D6).
(9) IPCC. Climate change and land:An IPCC special report on climate change, desertification, land
degradation, sustainable land management, food security, and greenhouse gas fluxes in terrestrial
ecosystems : summary for policymakers; Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2019.

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-k8ld5 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9634-9239 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

(10) Descals, A.; Gaveau, D. L. A.; Verger, A.; Sheil, D.; Naito, D.; Peñuelas, J. Unprecedented fire activity
above the Arctic Circle linked to rising temperatures. Science (New York, N.Y.) 2022, 378 (6619), 532–
537.
(11) Witze, A. The Arctic is burning like never before - and that's bad news for climate change. Nature
2020, 585 (7825), 336–337.
(12) Fewster, R. E.; Morris, P. J.; Ivanovic, R. F.; Swindles, G. T.; Peregon, A. M.; Smith, C. J. Imminent loss
of climate space for permafrost peatlands in Europe and Western Siberia. Nat. Clim. Change 2022, 12 (4),
373–379.
(13) Moore, P. D. The ecology of peat-forming processes: a review. Int. J. Coal Geol. 1989, 12 (1-4), 89–
103.
(14) D. W. van Krevelen. Graphical-statistical method for the study of structure and reaction processes
of coal. Fuel 1950 (29), 269–284.
(15) Glenn B. Stracher, Anupma Prakash, Guillermo Rein, Ed. Coal and Peat Fires: a Global Perspective;
Elsevier, 2015.
(16) Rein, G. Smouldering Fires and Natural Fuels. In Fire Phenomena and the Earth System; Belcher, C.
M., Ed.; John Wiley & Sons, 2013; pp 15–33. DOI: 10.1002/9781118529539.ch2.
(17) Yokelson, R. J.; Griffith, D. W. T.; Ward, D. E. Open‐path Fourier transform infrared studies of large‐
scale laboratory biomass fires. J. Geophys. Res. 1996, 101 (D15), 21067–21080.
(18) Blake, D.; Hinwood, A. L.; Horwitz, P. Peat fires and air quality: volatile organic compounds and
particulates. Chemosphere 2009, 76 (3), 419–423.
(19) Bahureksa, W.; Borch, T.; Young, R. B.; Weisbrod, C. R.; Blakney, G. T.; McKenna, A. M. Improved
Dynamic Range, Resolving Power, and Sensitivity Achievable with FT-ICR Mass Spectrometry at 21 T
Reveals the Hidden Complexity of Natural Organic Matter. Anal. Chem. 2022, 94 (32), 11382–11389.
(20) Williams, M. L.; Olomukoro, A. A.; Emmons, R. V.; Godage, N. H.; Gionfriddo, E. Matrix effects
demystified: Strategies for resolving challenges in analytical separations of complex samples. J. Sep. Sci.
2023, 46 (23), e2300571.
(21) Schneider, E.; Rüger, C. P.; Chacón-Patiño, M. L.; Somero, M.; Ruppel, M. M.; Ihalainen, M.; Köster,
K.; Sippula, O.; Czech, H.; Zimmermann, R. The complex composition of organic aerosols emitted during
burning varies between Arctic and boreal peat. Commun. Earth Environ. 2024, 5 (1).
(22) Hugelius, G.; Loisel, J.; Chadburn, S.; Jackson, R. B.; Jones, M.; MacDonald, G.; Marushchak, M.;
Olefeldt, D.; Packalen, M.; Siewert, M. B.; Treat, C.; Turetsky, M.; Voigt, C.; Yu, Z. Large stocks of peatland
carbon and nitrogen are vulnerable to permafrost thaw. PNAS 2020, 117 (34), 20438–20446.
(23) Hu, Y.; Fernandez-Anez, N.; Smith, T. E. L.; Rein, G. Review of emissions from smouldering peat fires
and their contribution to regional haze episodes. Int. J. Wildland Fire 2018, 27 (5), 293.
(24) Chen, H.; Zhao, W.; Liu, N. Thermal Analysis and Decomposition Kinetics of Chinese Forest Peat
under Nitrogen and Air Atmospheres. Energy Fuels 2011, 25 (2), 797–803.
(25) Yang, J.; Chen, H.; Zhao, W.; Zhou, J. TG–FTIR-MS study of pyrolysis products evolving from peat. J.
Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis 2016, 117, 296–309.
(26) Friederici, L.; Meščeriakovė, S.-M.; Neumann, A.; Sermyagina, E.; Meščeriakovas, A.; Lähde, A.;
Grimmer, C.; Streibel, T.; Rüger, C. P.; Zimmermann, R. Effect of hydrothermal carbonization and eutectic
salt mixture (KCl/LiCl) on the pyrolysis of Kraft lignin as revealed by thermal analysis coupled to advanced
high-resolution mass spectrometry. J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis 2022, 166, 105604.
(27) Samburova, V.; Schneider, E.; Rüger, C. P.; Inouye, S.; Sion, B.; Axelrod, K.; Bahdanovich, P.;
Friederici, L.; Raeofy, Y.; Berli, M.; Lutz, A.; Zimmermann, R.; Moosmüller, H. Modification of Soil

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-k8ld5 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9634-9239 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

Hydroscopic and Chemical Properties Caused by Four Recent California, USA Megafires. Fire 2023, 6 (5),
186.
(28) Neumann, A.; Chacón-Patiño, M. L.; Rodgers, R. P.; Rüger, C. P.; Zimmermann, R. Investigation of
Island/Single-Core- and Archipelago/Multicore-Enriched Asphaltenes and Their Solubility Fractions by
Thermal Analysis Coupled with High-Resolution Fourier Transform Ion Cyclotron Resonance Mass
Spectrometry. Energy Fuels 2021, 35 (5), 3808–3824.
(29) Chacón-Patiño, M. L.; Rowland, S. M.; Rodgers, R. P. Advances in Asphaltene Petroleomics. Part 1:
Asphaltenes Are Composed of Abundant Island and Archipelago Structural Motifs. Energy Fuels 2017, 31
(12), 13509–13518.
(30) Chacón-Patiño, M. L.; Gray, M. R.; Rüger, C.; Smith, D. F.; Glattke, T. J.; Niles, S. F.; Neumann, A.;
Weisbrod, C. R.; Yen, A.; McKenna, A. M.; Giusti, P.; Bouyssiere, B.; Barrère-Mangote, C.; Yarranton, H.;
Hendrickson, C. L.; Marshall, A. G.; Rodgers, R. P. Lessons Learned from a Decade-Long Assessment of
Asphaltenes by Ultrahigh-Resolution Mass Spectrometry and Implications for Complex Mixture Analysis.
Energy Fuels 2021, 35 (20), 16335–16376.
(31) Martens, P.; Czech, H.; Orasche, J.; Abbaszade, G.; Sklorz, M.; Michalke, B.; Tissari, J.; Bizjak, T.;
Ihalainen, M.; Suhonen, H.; Yli-Pirilä, P.; Jokiniemi, J.; Sippula, O.; Zimmermann, R. Brown Coal and
Logwood Combustion in a Modern Heating Appliance: The Impact of Combustion Quality and Fuel on
Organic Aerosol Composition. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2023, 57 (14), 5532–5543.
(32) Richter, H.; Howard, J. Formation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and their growth to soot—a
review of chemical reaction pathways. Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 2000, 26 (4-6), 565–608.
(33) DiDonato, N.; Chen, H.; Waggoner, D.; Hatcher, P. G. Potential origin and formation for molecular
components of humic acids in soils. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 2016, 178, 210–222.
(34) Vasilevich, R.; Lodygin, E.; Beznosikov, V.; Abakumov, E. Molecular composition of raw peat and
humic substances from permafrost peat soils of European Northeast Russia as climate change markers.
The Science of the total environment 2018, 615, 1229–1238.
(35) University of Eastern Finland. ILMARI - Aerosol physics, chemistry and toxicology research unit.
www.uef.fi/ilmari (accessed 2024-03-13).
(36) Rüger, C. P.; Sklorz, M.; Schwemer, T.; Zimmermann, R. Characterisation of ship diesel primary
particulate matter at the molecular level by means of ultra-high-resolution mass spectrometry coupled
to laser desorption ionisation--comparison of feed fuel, filter extracts and direct particle measurements.
Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 2015, 407 (20), 5923–5937.
(37) Friederici, L.; Schneider, E.; Burnens, G.; Streibel, T.; Giusti, P.; Rüger, C. P.; Zimmermann, R.
Comprehensive Chemical Description of Pyrolysis Chars from Low-Density Polyethylene by Thermal
Analysis Hyphenated to Different Mass Spectrometric Approaches. Energy Fuels 2021, 35 (22), 18185–
18193.
(38) Rüger, C. P.; Miersch, T.; Schwemer, T.; Sklorz, M.; Zimmermann, R. Hyphenation of Thermal
Analysis to Ultrahigh-Resolution Mass Spectrometry (Fourier Transform Ion Cyclotron Resonance Mass
Spectrometry) Using Atmospheric Pressure Chemical Ionization For Studying Composition and Thermal
Degradation of Complex Materials. Anal. Chem. 2015, 87 (13), 6493–6499.
(39) Hendrickson, C. L.; Quinn, J. P.; Kaiser, N. K.; Smith, D. F.; Blakney, G. T.; Chen, T.; Marshall, A. G.;
Weisbrod, C. R.; Beu, S. C. 21 Tesla Fourier Transform Ion Cyclotron Resonance Mass Spectrometer: A
National Resource for Ultrahigh Resolution Mass Analysis. J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 2015, 26 (9),
1626–1632.
(40) Rüger, C. P.; Schwemer, T.; Sklorz, M.; O'Connor, P. B.; Barrow, M. P.; Zimmermann, R.
Comprehensive chemical comparison of fuel composition and aerosol particles emitted from a ship

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-k8ld5 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9634-9239 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

diesel engine by gas chromatography atmospheric pressure chemical ionisation ultra-high resolution
mass spectrometry with improved data processing routines. European journal of mass spectrometry
(Chichester, England) 2017, 23 (1), 28–39.
(41) Eric Schneider; Dr Martha Liliana Chacon-Patino. Low-polar peat burning organic aerosol:
composition, structural motifs and formation:[data repository].
(42) Cho, Y.; Kim, Y. H.; Kim, S. Planar limit-assisted structural interpretation of
saturates/aromatics/resins/asphaltenes fractionated crude oil compounds observed by Fourier
transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry. Anal. Chem. 2011, 83 (15), 6068–6073.
(43) Lobodin, V. V.; Marshall, A. G.; Hsu, C. S. Compositional space boundaries for organic compounds.
Anal. Chem. 2012, 84 (7), 3410–3416.
(44) Barneto, A. G.; Carmona, J. A.; Alfonso, J. E. M.; Ferrer, J. A. C. Use of Thermogravimetry/Mass
Spectrometry Analysis to Explain the Origin of Volatiles Produced during Biomass Pyrolysis. Ind. Eng.
Chem. Res. 2009, 48 (15), 7430–7436.
(45) Yatavelli, R. L. N.; Chen, L.-W. A.; Knue, J.; Samburova, V.; Gyawali, M.; Watts, A. C.; Chakrabarty, R.
K.; Moosmüller, H.; Hodzic, A.; Wang, X.; Zielinska, B.; Chow, J. C.; Watson, J. G. Emissions and
Partitioning of Intermediate-Volatility and Semi-Volatile Polar Organic Compounds (I/SV-POCs) During
Laboratory Combustion of Boreal and Sub-Tropical Peat. Aerosol Sci Eng 2017, 1 (1), 25–32.
(46) Czech, H.; Miersch, T.; Orasche, J.; Abbaszade, G.; Sippula, O.; Tissari, J.; Michalke, B.; SchnelleKreis, J.; Streibel, T.; Jokiniemi, J.; Zimmermann, R. Chemical composition and speciation of particulate
organic matter from modern residential small-scale wood combustion appliances. The Science of the
total environment 2018, 612, 636–648.
(47) Iinuma, Y.; Brüggemann, E.; Gnauk, T.; Müller, K.; Andreae, M. O.; Helas, G.; Parmar, R.; Herrmann,
H. Source characterization of biomass burning particles: The combustion of selected European conifers,
African hardwood, savanna grass, and German and Indonesian peat. J. Geophys. Res. 2007, 112 (D8).
(48) Lin, C.; Ceburnis, D.; Hellebust, S.; Buckley, P.; Wenger, J.; Canonaco, F.; Prévôt, A. S. H.; Huang, R.J.; O'Dowd, C.; Ovadnevaite, J. Characterization of Primary Organic Aerosol from Domestic Wood, Peat,
and Coal Burning in Ireland. Environmental science & technology 2017, 51 (18), 10624–10632.
(49) Mitra, T.; Zhang, T.; Sediako, A. D.; Thomson, M. J. Understanding the formation and growth of
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and young soot from n-dodecane in a sooting laminar coflow
diffusion flame. Combust. Flame 2019, 202, 33–42.
(50) Ye, Y.; Zhan, H.; Yu, X.; Li, J.; Wang, X.; Xie, Z. Detection of organosulfates and nitrooxyorganosulfates in Arctic and Antarctic atmospheric aerosols, using ultra-high resolution FT-ICR mass
spectrometry. The Science of the total environment 2021, 767, 144339.
(51) Purcell, J. M.; Juyal, P.; Kim, D.-G.; Rodgers, R. P.; Hendrickson, C. L.; Marshall, A. G. Sulfur
Speciation in Petroleum: Atmospheric Pressure Photoionization or Chemical Derivatization and
Electrospray Ionization Fourier Transform Ion Cyclotron Resonance Mass Spectrometry. Energy Fuels
2007, 21 (5), 2869–2874.
(52) Kosyakov, D. S.; Ul'yanovskii, N. V.; Latkin, T. B.; Pokryshkin, S. A.; Berzhonskis, V. R.; Polyakova, O.
V.; Lebedev, A. T. Peat burning - An important source of pyridines in the earth atmosphere.
Environmental pollution (Barking, Essex : 1987) 2020, 266 (Pt 1), 115109.
(53) Ehrmann, B. M.; Henriksen, T.; Cech, N. B. Relative importance of basicity in the gas phase and in
solution for determining selectivity in electrospray ionization mass spectrometry. Journal of the
American Society for Mass Spectrometry 2008, 19 (5), 719–728.
(54) Neumann, A.; Tiemann, O.; Hansen, H. J.; Rüger, C. P.; Zimmermann, R. Detailed Comparison of
Xenon APPI (9.6/8.4 eV), Krypton APPI (10.6/10.0 eV), APCI, and APLI (266 nm) for Gas Chromatography

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-k8ld5 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9634-9239 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

High Resolution Mass Spectrometry of Standards and Complex Mixtures. J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom.
2023, 34 (8), 1632–1646.
(55) Chacón-Patiño, M. L.; Rowland, S. M.; Rodgers, R. P. Advances in Asphaltene Petroleomics. Part 2:
Selective Separation Method That Reveals Fractions Enriched in Island and Archipelago Structural Motifs
by Mass Spectrometry. Energy Fuels 2018, 32 (1), 314–328.
(56) Sleno, L.; Volmer, D. A. Ion activation methods for tandem mass spectrometry. J. Mass Spectrom.
2004, 39 (10), 1091–1112.
(57) Dong, C.; Hu, W.; Wang, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Zhu, G.; Han, Y. Double-bond equivalence linear equations for
structural interpretation of fossil hydrocarbons. Fuel 2023, 332, 126206.
(58) Rein, G.; Cleaver, N.; Ashton, C.; Pironi, P.; Torero, J. L. The severity of smouldering peat fires and
damage to the forest soil. CATENA 2008, 74 (3), 304–309.
(59) Zhang, Y.; Metz, J. N.; Gross, A. S.; Siskin, M. Unexpected Structural Effects on the Onset of Thermal
Reactions of Aromatic Hydrocarbons. Energy Fuels 2023, 37 (8), 5792–5804.
(60) Juselius, T.; Ravolainen, V.; Zhang, H.; Piilo, S.; Müller, M.; Gallego-Sala, A.; Väliranta, M. Newly
initiated carbon stock, organic soil accumulation patterns and main driving factors in the High Arctic
Svalbard, Norway. Scientific reports 2022, 12 (1), 4679.
(61) Kovaleva, N. O.; Kovalev, I. V. Transformation of lignin in surface and buried soils of mountainous
landscapes. Eurasian Soil Sci. 2009, 42 (11), 1270–1281.
(62) Sutradhar, S.; Fatehi, P. Latest development in the fabrication and use of lignin-derived humic acid.
Biotechnol. Biofuels Bioprod. 2023, 16 (1), 38.
(63) Waksman, S. A. Humus:Origin, chemical composition and importance in nature, 1936.
(64) Yang, H.; Yan, R.; Chen, H.; Lee, D. H.; Zheng, C. Characteristics of hemicellulose, cellulose and lignin
pyrolysis. Fuel 2007, 86 (12-13), 1781–1788.
(65) Mase, C.; Hubert-Roux, M.; Afonso, C.; Giusti, P. Contribution of atmospheric pressure chemical
ionization mass spectrometry for the characterization of bio-oils from lignocellulosic biomass:
Comparison with electrospray ionization and atmospheric pressure photoionization. Journal of Analytical
and Applied Pyrolysis 2022, 167, 105694.
(66) Laskin, A.; Smith, J. S.; Laskin, J. Molecular characterization of nitrogen-containing organic
compounds in biomass burning aerosols using high-resolution mass spectrometry. Environ. Sci. Technol.
2009, 43 (10), 3764–3771.
(67) Benedict, K. B.; Prenni, A. J.; Carrico, C. M.; Sullivan, A. P.; Schichtel, B. A.; Collett, J. L. Enhanced
concentrations of reactive nitrogen species in wildfire smoke. Atmos. Environ. 2017, 148, 8–15.
(68) Serebrennikova, O. V.; Russkikh, I. V.; Strel’nikova, E. B.; Kharanzhevskaya, Y. A.; Fedorov, D. V.
Composition of the Organic Compounds of Different Peat Types from the Southern Taiga Subzone of
Western Siberia. Solid Fuel Chem. 2023, 57 (1), 21–28.
(69) He, D.; Huang, H.; Arismendi, G. G. n-Alkane distribution in ombrotrophic peatlands from the
northeastern Alberta, Canada, and its paleoclimatic implications. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology,
Palaeoecology 2019, 528, 247–257.
(70) Solihat, N. N.; Yustiawati; Kim, S.; Kim, S. Elucidating molecular level impact of peat fire on soil
organic matter by laser desorption ionization Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass
spectrometry. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 2019, 411 (27), 7303–7313.

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-k8ld5 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9634-9239 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

For Table of Content (TOC) Only

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-k8ld5 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9634-9239 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

