Life Cycle Based Risk and Opportunity Mapping: A systematic
collaborative procedure to integrate environmental and health aspects in
early innovation as possible pre-screening to the safe and sustainable by
design assessments 1
Authors: Kärnman T. a, Schellenberger, S. b, Gottfridsson, M. a, Halling, M. a, Johansson, K. a,
Rydberg, T. a and Hildenbrand,J. b
a: IVL Swedish environmental research institute; b: RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

GRAPHICAL ABSTRACT

Key words: Safe and sustainable early innovations, Safe and Sustainable by Design (SSbD)
pre-assessment, Hotspot analysis, LCA dialogue.; Sustainable innovation; Life cycle-based
opportunity mapping; Life cycle thinking;
Abstract
In this article we introduce a method to be used for life cycle-based assessment in early
innovation to fill the gap of tools for assessing emerging technologies. The approach is
intended to support innovation processes for clean technology. Thus, it needs to facilitate a
dialogue and encourage innovators to share uncertain information. Such information could

1

Title based on a presentation to be held at the SETAC Europe 35th Annual Meeting.

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2025-p93rp-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0007-7563-9334 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC 4.0

potentially hamper the development process if conclusions are drawn based on concepts
before scale-up. For the required flexibility and transparency, we propose a series of direct
exchanges and preliminary evaluations. The Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability, outlined
to implement the European Green Deal, calls for the transition towards use of safe and
sustainable chemicals, hence the Joint Research Center (JRC) published a framework for
Safe and Sustainable by Design (SSbD) chemicals and materials. Among the key features of
the framework is the application for early-stage developments of innovations, during which
the outcome can be influenced, and parameters are not fully decided. The method proposed
in this publication, life cycle-based risk and opportunity mapping (LCBROM), may be used
both prior an SSbD assessment to facilitate its scoping process, as well as during an SSbD
procedure. An LCBROM intends to bring together knowledge and requirements from
different stakeholders in an innovation process and has been applied in four case studies
within the area of clean technology. By applying the method we have realized that i)
opportunity mapping is key for good involvement of the innovation owner but can only be
performed if there is a suitable benchmark technology as reference or the consequences of
inaction can be defined, ii) Several methods exist that in theory could be applied for
assessing emerging technologies, although none seems to be commonly used, and iii)
LCBROM has the potential to fulfill four criteria that we see as crucial for tools intended for
assessing innovations at low TRL. A major benefit of the mapping approach is the increased
transparency and communication between technology developer, problem owner and
assessment experts. Such communication guides the process and allows for understanding
of each other’s questions and feedback. LCBROM will be further improved and tested in the
EU funded research programme BioSusTex.
Introduction
In 2020, the European Commission (EC) presented the Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
as a response to the European Green Deal (European Commission, 2020). The strategy calls
for the transition towards use of safe and sustainable chemicals, hence the Joint Research
Center (JRC) published a framework for Safe and Sustainable by Design (SSbD) chemicals
and materials (Caldeira et al., 2022). It defines criteria and evaluation procedures for
chemicals and materials.
The first part of the EC SSbD framework, hereafter referred to as the SSbD framework,
considers the (re)design of chemicals and materials. The framework presents a (nonexhaustive) list of design principles to consider during the (re)design (Caldeira et al., 2022).
In early innovation, there may be challenges in addressing all those design principles due to
lack of data and other causes. Having a life cycle-based tool for assessing the innovation
against these principles would make the transition towards SSbD materials smoother for the
industry. As a response for that need, we suggest the use of Life Cycle-based Risk and
Opportunity Mapping (LCBROM), conceptually illustrated in Figure 1.
LCBROM is a mostly qualitative screening approach to investigate potential risks as “red
flags” and “critical hot spots” in early innovation by considering all life cycle stages
(material sourcing, production, use, and disposal). When a benchmark technology with
known risks and shortcomings is available, advantages of the innovation can be highlighted
as opportunities. The goal of LCBROM is to analyze concerns and opportunities for
innovations at low technology readiness levels (TRL) to guide it towards a more sustainable
solution. Where quantitative results from other studies are available in a suitable format

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2025-p93rp-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0007-7563-9334 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC 4.0

(e.g., from previous life cycle assessment of related materials or processes) they should be
considered. For some substances complementary hazard and risk assessments may be
performed to better understand results related to toxicity impacts. Transferable results from
completed LCBROM studies should be stored as modules in a repository for further use in
other application contexts.
The second part of the SSbD framework covers safety and sustainability assessment of the
chemical/material and consists of five assessment steps (the fifth being voluntary). Before
initiating an extensive SSbD assessment it is beneficial to clarify its scope. To facilitate this,
LCBROM can serve as a starting point for exploring the entire life cycle of the innovation
(the innovation being a chemical, process, material or article). Throughout this process, the
innovation is assessed qualitatively and where possible, quantitatively against human- and
environmental risks and opportunities in different life cycle steps. During the LCBROM
assessment, the technology developer gains insight into how their innovation affect humans
and the environment across different life cycle phases by identifying key hotspots. For this
to be effective, the safety and sustainability expert leading the assessment must develop an
understanding of the function of the innovation, how it is integrated into a product system
or process application, as well as its production, use, and disposal scenarios. The purpose of
the LCBROM is not to replace any quantitative assessment, but rather to pinpoint potential
hotspot for upcoming assessments by identifying knowledge and information gaps.
Consequently, parts of the life cycle for which available information is sufficient to indicate
low or negligible negative impacts on human and/or environmental health and safety can
be put on hold.

Figure 1. The LCBROM methodology to assess (a) early innovations in chemicals, materials, or processes. The
(b) collaborative LCBROM assessment includes a value proposition for the new invention, a mapping of relevant
stakeholders for further assessment, and a life cycle mapping of the process or product system. Risks and
opportunities at all life cycle stages are systematically analyzed and summarized in a (c) Material, Energy, and
Toxicity (MET) matrix. This methodology serves as a (d) pre-assessment for SSbD, supporting technology
scoping and identifying potential hotspots for life cycle risks in early innovations.

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2025-p93rp-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0007-7563-9334 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC 4.0

Long before the EC launched the SSbD framework, Lang-Koetz et al. (2008) (among others)
recognized the need for environmental assessments of product ideas and concepts in early
innovation, and how this could be done by applying life-cycle thinking and integrating
environmental assessment into the innovation process. In our work, we have built upon the
research questions explored by Lang-Koetz et al. (2008) while also incorporating
opportunity mapping, which we recognize as a powerful driver for decision-makers.
Moreover, the discussion of opportunities in terms of value proposition of the innovation
can strengthen the engagement of technology developers. This approach fosters greater
involvement in the assessment, which may be lower if the focus is solely on risks and
environmental concerns. Hence, our research explored the question: How can risks and
opportunities of innovations be assessed at low TRL?
In this article we introduce a method to be used for life cycle-based assessment in early
innovation to fill the gap of tools for assessing emerging technologies. To test out the
method, it has been applied in four case studies in the research programme Mistra
TerraClean: i) Development of a technology to concentrate rare earth elements (REEs) from
water from a discontinued mine; ii) Application of iron sulphide doped activated carbon to
remove mercury from a side stream in an enrichment plant; iii) Chemical modification of
PEX material to prevent unwanted bacterial growth in the distribution of drinking water;
iv) Removal of CO2 from indoor air with filters based on cellulose nano fibrils and activated
carbon. All the technologies from the case studies were at low TRL when the technology
concept and application was formulated. The first of the described case studies will be used
as an example in this article. All applications in the case studies are related to material and
device development to smartly treat emissions to water and air from current processes and
to treat contaminated areas while recovering resources.
Methodology
The structured development of LCBROM
This article highlights the absence of tools that can assess human- and environmental
impact of emerging technologies in an easy, comprehensive, and cost-efficient way. We
address this issue by presenting a method that can serve as a tool fulfilling these
requirements. While doing so, we also present the structural procedure for our method
development, which has been inspired by the development of the Circular Strategies
Scanner (Blomsma et al., 2019) which in turn was developed using the Design Research
Methodology (DRM) (Blessing & Chakrabarti, 2009).
We initiated the method development during fall 2022. To describe its development
journey, we have chosen to divide it into three phases, all containing of a descriptive study
and a prescriptive study. Table 1 describes the aim, main activities, and outcome of each
study.
Table 1. The structured development of LCBROM divided into three phases, all of which containing a
descriptive study and a prescriptive study.

Aim:

Phase I
Descriptive study I
Apply a methodological procedure for the evaluation of the

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2025-p93rp-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0007-7563-9334 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC 4.0

Main activities:

Outcome:

Aim:

Main activities:

Outcome:

Aim:
Main activities:
Outcome:

Aim:
Main activities:
Outcome:

Aim:
Main activities:

Outcome:

most important environmental and human health aspects of material
production, application, post‐consumer fate and management in early
innovation using a MET matrix or similar eco-design tool to obtain a
life cycle-based risk mapping.
Unstructured dialogues were initiated with technology- and problem
owners to identify the function of the innovation and the best
approach for identifying potential human- and environmental impact
of the innovation.
Realization that a structured framework and well thought questions is
needed to facilitate communication.
Prescriptive study I
Develop a structured method for mapping human- and/or
environmental risks of emerging technologies using a life cycle
thinking.
Internal discussions on what aspects to include, how to facilitate
communication with non-experts, how to ensure that no aspect is
overlooked, and how to formalize the procedure.
The concept of life cycle-based risk mapping (LCBRM) was developed
in which the MET matrix was in focus. Questionnaires (Q1 and Q2) to
be used as basis for discussion topics on stakeholder meetings was
developed.
Phase II
Descriptive study II
Test out the first version of the method.
Introduced the MET matrix and questionnaires to the technology- and
problem owners.
Realization that technology owners may not be willing to discuss
risks of their innovation unless also opportunities is presented as a
counterpart.
Prescriptive study II
To refine the framework based on the outcome of the feedback
received from technology- and problem owners.
Internal discussions on how to improve to method.
By adding focus on opportunities LCBRM method was transformed
into LCBROM.
Phase III
Descriptive study III
Test out the improved method in four case studies and concretize its
applicability domain.
Continued meetings with stakeholders in various case studies.
Structuralized documentation of the method development itself as
well as a description of its approach and possible uses.
Poster presentation of LCBROM at SETAC LCA symposium 2024.
The developed LCBROMs in the case studies was presented to the
steering group of the research programme at which feedback was
obtained. Hence, the iterative nature of the method could be tested.
The method was formally described in case study reports.

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2025-p93rp-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0007-7563-9334 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC 4.0

Dissemination of the method via the SETAC LCA symposium 2024.

Aim
Main activities:

Outcome:

Realization that the method has great potential to be used in the SSbD
framework outlined by the EC.
Planned prescriptive study III
Identify further improvement of the method as well as dissemination
of the method.
Application of LCBROM in at least three case studies in BioSusTex, an
EU funded research programme that will implement the SSbD as
outlined by the EC. To be initiated during spring 2025.
Platform presentation of the method at the 35th SETAC Europe
Annual Meeting in May 2025.
Publishing a scientific article describing LCBROM.
Learnings from the application of LCBROM in BioSusTex.
Further dissemination of the method via this article and SETAC
conference 2025.

The procedure for carrying out an LCBROM assessment
The LCBROM method is an iterative process, illustrated in Figure 2, with continuous
interaction between stakeholders to derive at potential risks and opportunities of the
innovation. It is recommended to have the MET matrix in mind throughout the whole
assessment. To guide the LCBROM practitioner, a non-exhaustive list of questions to keep
in mind during the assessment is presented in Table S1 in the Supplementary Information.

Figure 2. Flowchart describing the steps of the LCBROM method. The arrows represent the iterative nature of
the process. Q1 and Q2 indicate questionnaires that may be used in step 1 and 2 for early information gathering ,
both being presented in Table S2 in the Supplementary Information.

Initiation and framing of LCBROM assessment
An LCBROM is ideally initiated once there is a distinct application for the innovation and
laboratory experiments show positive results. The first step for the LCBROM practitioner
(often someone with an LCA background, not necessarily involved in material
development) is to perform an initial stakeholder mapping. As there are several
stakeholders involved with different expertise and goals, stakeholder mapping is an

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2025-p93rp-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0007-7563-9334 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC 4.0

essential part of the LCBROM method to ensure that the LCBROM practitioner has the
possibility to access the right information and data needed to perform a useful assessment.
The core team in the LCBROM assessment could be rather small in the beginning, for
example a three-person team with competences in LCA, risk assessment, and technology
systems, and successively expanded during the course of the assessment. The stakeholder
mapping facilitates this expansion of the LCBROM team.
Specifically, a three-person team is recommended in which competences of LCA, risk
assessment, and technology systems are required.
Once the stakeholder mapping is completed, an information meeting is recommended at
which the LCBROM method can be presented. During such a meeting, we suggest that the
strengths and limitations of LCBROM is discussed to ensure reasonable expectations of the
upcoming assessment, both in terms of actual result but also what will be required from
each stakeholder.
After the information meeting, a questionnaire (Q1) may be sent to the identified
stakeholders. The purpose of Q1 is to document the problem definition including a
background describing a specific case, benchmark technologies (if any) and stakeholders
involved in the case. Note that the purpose of the questionnaire is to support the LCBROM
practitioner in what information is needed at the start of the LCBROM assessment.
Depending on the dynamics of a working group (e.g., technology owner, problem owner
and LCBROM practitioner), an approach without questionnaires may be applied to
populate the MET matrix, for example using documentation from dialogues or workshops.
Start-up meeting
The purpose of the start-up meeting is to get started with the LCBROM assessment. The
following topics may be discussed.
•
•
•
•
•
•

Introduction of the LCBROM purpose and method
Problem definition
Introduction of the technology/material and the intended application
Discussion on benchmark technologies
Discuss any uncertainties regarding Q1 (if relevant)
The need for a non-disclosure agreement

The purpose of the meeting(s) with stakeholders in the assessment is to populate the MET
matrix. Moreover, the meetings provide an opportunity to initiate a dialogue among
stakeholders about technological developments and the associated cycle-based risks and
opportunities. The workshop allows participants to learn from one another and to establish
a common ground and a trusting atmosphere where ideas and information can be freely
shared. To simplify that process, a second questionnaire (Q2) may be sent after the start-up
meeting to allow the technology owner and problem owner to reflect upon the technology
from a material, energy, and toxicity perspective. For that reason, the questions in Q2 may
be briefly discussed at the end of the start-up meeting. The questions in Q2 lie the
foundation for the agenda of the upcoming meeting(s), hence no answers to Q2 are
expected beforehand.

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2025-p93rp-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0007-7563-9334 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC 4.0

Pre-study
At this step, the LCBROM practitioner is supposed to initiate a literature review scanning
the availability of existing studies of the benchmark technology. Such studies could for
example be LCAs and/or risk assessments. The answers added to Q1 may serve as key
words for this literature review. Depending on whether (impact assessment) methods are
up to date and described transparently, this can either be used immediately or replicated to
fill in data in the matrix.
The pre-study also includes documentation of the problem definition into the report
template. Potential usage(s) of the material should be described to facilitate a life cycle
perspective of the assessment. If there are no specific use cases for which the material is
being developed, it is recommended to define an assumed case to assess the full life cycle
and identify opportunities. Benchmarks should be at least state of the art, meaning that the
technology to which the innovation is being compared with should be the most advanced
and sophisticated alternative currently available.
Meeting(s) with stakeholders
As the LCBROM procedure is iterative, several meetings are likely needed during the
process. The stakeholders and LCBROM practitioner should discuss the questions in Q2 and
fill in an MET matrix. When answering the questions both risks and opportunities should be
considered. If any risk mitigation measures are planned this should also be described.
Knowledge gaps identified during the discussion should end up as action points for further
work by either the LCBROM practitioner, material developer, or problem owner to reduce
uncertainties of the assessment.
Summary of information in a report
The report template for the LCBROM is continuously updated throughout the entire
process. Towards the end of the assessment, the LCBROM practitioner is supposed to refine
the information already added to the template and wrap up the assessment using the MET
matrix, introduced in Figure 3, and final conclusions and recommendations.
Every cell in the MET matrix combines either material, energy or toxicity related to the life
cycle stage, such as material use in production or energy use during disposal. Input added
to the matrix should be self-explanatory in that sense that the reader should understand the
underlying message without consulting the bulk text.
Depending on whether different aspects are identified as opportunities, risks or areas
requiring further investigation, a color coding is suggested (e.g., green, red or yellow,
similar to a traffic light) to provide a better overview. Although most information in the
MET matrix comes with uncertainties due to low TRL, some may be particularly uncertain
and highlighting those with italic font is recommended.
The results from an LCBROM can be used for several purposes, depending on the scope of
the assessment. If the objective of the assessment is to guide the innovation towards a more
sustainable alternative compared to a benchmark technology, the results may be used for
decision-making. If the method is used as a pre-step or part of an SSbD assessment, it is not

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2025-p93rp-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0007-7563-9334 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC 4.0

just the MET matrix itself that represents the main result. Equally important are the lessons
learned during the assessment regarding life cycle mapping and system understanding,
which may lead to optimization of the new invention (redesign) if negative impacts are
identified.
How does the LCBROM method support SSbD assessment for technologies in early
innovation?
LCBROM is a tool for early review of the life cycle stages and potential risks and
opportunities of an innovation. The integration of human and environmental health
evaluations in early innovation of chemicals/materials has been climbing on the agenda for
the last couple of years. Not least because of the publication of the SSbD framework by
(Caldeira et al., 2022). Even though LCBROM was not originally developed for the sole
purpose of SSbD assessments, its usefulness in such assessments is high. Hence, this section
exemplifies how the method can support SSbD assessments.
The (re)design phase
As illustrated by Moniruzzaman Moni et al. (2019), improvements made during the design
phase potentially have a larger impact on the environmental performance than
improvements implemented at higher TRL when many decisions are already established.
LCBROM allows the innovation to be successively improved using a systematic MET
matrix2 as a tool to evaluate completeness and balance of information. Applying the SSbD
design principles into the MET matrix facilitates the evaluation of the (re)designed material
against Material, Energy and Toxicity using a life cycle perspective at an early stage. The
connection between the MET matrix and the eight (non-exhaustive) SSbD design principles
are illustrated in Figure 3.

2 References indicates a report by can Hemel and Brezet (“A Promising Approach to Sustainable

Production and Consumption”) as origin to the MET matrix, although it is now out of print.

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2025-p93rp-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0007-7563-9334 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC 4.0

Figure 3. SSbD design principles (colored bubbles) connection to the MET matrix used in LCBROM.

The safety and sustainability assessment
Step 1 – Hazard assessment of chemicals/materials
The starting point for an SSbD assessment according to the SSbD framework is to
investigate the intrinsic hazard of the chemical/material being developed. Even though the
LCBROM method does not serve as a tool itself to assess the intrinsic hazard of the
chemical/material, it allows the technology developer to start thinking of the innovation in
terms of toxicity early on as the toxicity aspect is a cornerstone of the LCBROM method.
Depending on the working group and resources available, one can apply toxicity
assessments as a support for exploring the toxicity aspects of the MET matrix. This has been
tested in a couple of case studies, one of which being introduced for illustration in this
paper.
Step 2 – Human health and safety aspects in the chemical/material production and processing phase
The life cycle perspective, more specifically cradle-to-gate (gate being the production and
processing phase), is introduced in step 2 of the SSbD framework. Having performed an
LCBROM prior to the SSbD assessment would result in a smoother transition toward
expanding the scope as one moves from step 1 to 2 since the life cycle would already have
been mapped and the supply chain is identified. Occupational hazards in a preliminary
supply chain can thus be identified. As the purpose of LCBROM is not to deliver a
quantitative assessment, it is not intended to replace any assessments in step 2. However, it
may pinpoint hotspots to separate those areas of the life cycle that may require further
attention from those that may require less attention in the qualitative assessment.
Requirements for protective equipment and prevention through layout (encasing processes
and logistic) can be identified and discussed with the technology developer.
Step 3 – Human health and environmental aspects in the final application phase
The third step of the SSbD framework is focusing on human health and environmental
aspects in the final application phase of the innovation. Mapping potential risks and
opportunities of the use phase is included in the LCBROM method and could potentially
serve as a starting point for the quantitative assessments in this step.
The innovations considered in the four case studies (introduced earlier in this article) were
mostly applied by professional users. From a toxicity perspective, it is important to establish
whether the innovation is intended for consumers and/or professionals. Consumers are
likely not trained to use personal protection equipment (PPE) while professionals do,
meaning that the risk of exposure may be higher for consumers than professionals.
Assessing the innovation against energy consumption during different life cycle stages is an
important part of the LCBROM assessment. In the use phase, energy consumption can be
related to climate change and pollution if fossil energy carriers are used.
Step 4 – Environmental sustainability assessment

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2025-p93rp-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0007-7563-9334 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC 4.0

The core of the fourth step is life cycle assessment (LCA) following the procedure suggested
for product environmental footprints, which poses a challenge for materials in early
innovation (i.e., those at low TRL). Challenges associated with LCA in early innovation was
pointed out by Hetherington et al. (2014). For example, the challenge of future unknown
features and data gaps was discussed. There may be data gaps considering different life
cycle stages, upscaling parameters and emissions. In addition to those challenges pointed
out by Hetherington et al. (2014), it is very costly to perform a full LCA, both in terms of
effort and money. Hence, there is a need for life cycle-based tools for assessing innovations
at low TRL, which was also pointed out by Moniruzzaman Moni et al. (2019). Data that are
available for benchmark processes may be aggregated and thus representative for average
industry processes, but not suitable to guide development of innovations and identify
relevant parameters.
Challenges of performing an LCA at low TRL (<5) was also pointed out in the SSbD
framework. To overcome such challenges, the framework suggests the use of Prospective
LCA. Although there are challenges in performing prospective LCAs as well, there are
several frameworks, e.g., Picchino et al. (2016), Buyle et al. (2019) and Thonemann et al.
(2020), that can guide the LCA practitioner in performing such assessments. However, we
would argue that the use of prospective LCA would benefit from the application of an
LCBROM in advance. For example, applying LCBROM at TRL 1-2 would allow the LCA
practitioner to map the life cycle and understand what type of challenges he or she may face
during the upcoming assessment once the technology reaches TRL 3-5. Additionally, the
SSbD framework calls for the application of LCA for all uses and production routes of the
innovation. Performing an (prospective) LCA for all those scenarios will be costly and time
consuming. Having applied LCBROM in advance would enable the LCA practitioners to
gain an understanding on which are the most likely areas of concerns and hence require
extra effort in estimating its input parameters.
Applying the SSbD concept in early innovations requires tools and methods that are
adapted to low data availability and high uncertainty. Except for prospective LCA, there are
no such methods communicated in the SSbD framework or its guidance for the life cyclebased assessment. Some tools exist (or are under development), for example the screening
level approach developed by Pizzol et al. (2023) that specifically addresses multi-component
nanomaterials. It uses extensive questionnaires that may be difficult for technology
developers to answer, hence expert input may be required. Another example of an existing
tool is the Environmentally responsible product assessment matrix developed by Graedel et
al. (1995). Although there are existing tools, none seem to capture all necessary ingredients
for being the commonly applied tool for emerging technologies: i) easy-to-use, ii) inclusion of
all relevant impacts, iii) wide applicability domain, and iv) low cost in terms of time and
money. We would argue that LCBROM could potentially fill that gap of tools because of its
iterative nature and use of general questions that can be applied to most technology fields.
As already pointed out, there are not enough data to perform full LCAs at low TRL. Instead,
LCBROM can be used to map out relevant life cycle stages and identify potential risks that
the material may face during upscaling. Additionally, if there is a benchmark technology
available on the market, it can also identify potential opportunities for the innovation based
on known shortcomings of the benchmark technology. Identifying such risks and
opportunities will help to avoid lock-in to unsustainable decisions and to continuously

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2025-p93rp-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0007-7563-9334 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC 4.0

improve the material. As the material reaches higher TRL and more data becomes available,
the LCBROM can be further refined. Eventually, there will be enough information on the
innovation to perform a first, rough, LCA and finally a full LCA. Hence, LCBROM could
serve as a starting tool for the life cycle-based assessment required in step 4 of the SSbD
framework for materials in early innovation.
Step 5 – Scientific basis for the socio-economic sustainability assessment
A fifth step is available in the SSbD framework, focusing on socio-economic assessments.
Even though methods exist, such as life cycle costing (LCC) and social life cycle assessment
(S-LCA), for the purpose of this type of assessment, the framework is pointing out that it
requires further work to ensure its applicability. Hence, this step is voluntary. Despite that,
we foresee this step to be mandatory in the future, which is why we have initiated
discussions on how to incorporate social and economic factors into the LCBROM
assessment. This is, however, out of scope of this article.
Case study results
LCBROM has been applied in four case studies, one of which is focusing on the
development of a technology used to concentrate REEs from water from a discontinued
mine using a hollow fibre liquid supported membrane (HFSLM). Its life cycle is being
described in Figure 4 consisting of material production via impregnation, use via selective
sorption of REE and disposal via incineration and/or recycling. The hypothesis of the work
was that a REE solution can be concentrated by selective separation of REE. To further
improve the technology, an LCBROM was performed to identify potential risks and
opportunities.

Figure 4. Life cycle description of the technology used for retrieving REE from wastewater from discontinued
mines.

During the pre-study it became clear that solvent extraction (SX) in mixer settlers was the
benchmark technology to be used for identifying opportunities (Turgeon et al., 2023). For
that purpose, a literature review was performed to identify the major challenges that SX
faces from an environmental point of view.

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2025-p93rp-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0007-7563-9334 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC 4.0

The first significant finding, also identified by Navarro & Zhao (2014), was that there are
very few LCAs (or other articles focusing on the environmental impacts) of REE production
and specifically the solvent extraction step. In fact, we only found two articles focusing on
the solvent extraction phase (Vahidi & Zhao, 2016, 2017).
This was somewhat surprising as the second finding was that the main contributor to the
overall environmental impact in REE production seems to be the solvent extraction step
(approximately 30% according to Vahidi & Zhao (2017)). It should, however, be noted that
most articles highlight that there are, in general, very few LCAs on REE production in
combination with poor data quality and information (Schreiber et al., 2021).
The use of hydrochloric acid (HCl) in SX was identified as a challenge since it is being used
in high quantities which generates a significant environmental impact (Vahidi & Zhao, 2016,
2017). For that reason, using lower amounts of HCl, or no such use at all, was highlighted as
an opportunity for the novel technology. On the other hand, both alternatives, the
benchmark technology and the proposed new extraction method, are using kerosene which
is a petroleum-extracted mixture of aliphatic and aromatic hydrocarbons, cycloalkanes and
alkylbenzenes with varying structures and toxicities. As such, there is high uncertainty in
establishing safety risks with this mixture since various compounds in the mixture are more
toxic than others. Many of the potential components of kerosene are known to be mutagenic
and reproductive toxic as well as highly toxic to various organs. Due to its toxicity, the use
of kerosene was marked as a risk in the MET matrix. Table 2 provides a simplified MET
matrix from the case study, anonymized to avoid disclosure of confidential information.
Table 2. Overview of a simplified MET matrix from a case study in Mistra TerraClean. Colour-code: green =
opportunities, red = risks, yellow = further research is needed. Findings and assumptions are denoted F and A
respectively.

Materials

Production

Use

Disposal

F: Possibly use of
recycled and/or
renewable
polypropylene and
polyethylene in the
HFSLM.
F: Upscaling is difficult
because of gel
formation which
occurs at sub-optimal
operating conditions.
F: Hazardous waste
containing acids must
be handled.

Energy
F: Perhaps not a
significantly energy
intense production
process of the
membrane.
F: Possibly less energy
intense than the
current? state-of-theart technology.

Toxicity
A: Production of
solvents and
extractants may release
toxic emissions.
F: Less hazardous
extractants needed.
F: Use of kerosene.

F: The HFSLM is likely A: Waste may contain
to be incinerated.
traces of metals.

Once the first draft of the MET matrix was delivered to the technology owner, it was
presented for the steering group of the research programme, which brought in an earlystage peer evaluation. Based on feedback from that presentation and the content of the MET
matrix, the iterative nature of LCBROM was tested. The findings of the LCBROM were

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2025-p93rp-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0007-7563-9334 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC 4.0

refined and the technology owners decided to investigate the possibility to substitute
kerosene. That was firstly done via a toxicity assessment in which the hazards of kerosene
were mapped. Secondly, a literature review was performed in which it was found that
alternatives for kerosene are available. Since the research programme is coming to an end,
there was not enough time or budget to follow the innovation towards higher TRL and
refining the LCBROM further. Despite that, the LCBROM did show its potential in
identifying risks and opportunities to steer the innovation towards a more sustainable
alternative.
Discussion
Using a matrix to summarize learnings from a life cycle-based assessment has been done
since 1995 when Graedel et al. (1995) introduced a 5x5 matrix called the Environmentally
Responsible Product Assessment Matrix. In that matrix, an innovation is assessed against
material choice, energy use, solid residues, liquid residues, and gaseous residues using a life
cycle perspective. The assessment is qualitative in its nature in which expert input, surveys
and checklists are used to derive a figure of merit for the innovation. LCBROM is a
modernized version of this tool with some commonalities and some differences. An
important difference is that the tool by Graedel et al. (1995) used a grading system for a
deriving single score to be used for tracking improvements. As LCBROM is intended to be
used for hotspot identification for a various number of technology types, a scoring system
has not been deemed necessary at this point.
Another distinctive difference between LCBROM and the Environmentally Responsible
Product Assessment Matrix is the possibility to identify opportunities. To ensure that the
innovation ends up with lower human and environmental impact than the state-of-the-art
technology, the opportunity mapping is as important as the risk mapping. As the LCBROM
is intended to be used in early innovation, the developer has the chance to fine tune the
innovation regarding its production process, usage and/or future waste treatment in terms
of material, energy and/or chemical choices. For that reason, LCBROM requires a reference
technology to be able to identify opportunities. If no reference can be established, the
comparison should be made against a scenario at which no action at all is made.
Several other tools have been suggested throughout the years in addition to the 5x5 matrix
by Graedel et al (1995). An example of such a tool is the concept of Material Input Per
Service (MIPS) unit developed at the Wuppertal Institute (Ritthof et al., 2023). MIPS
consider predominantly resource use and assume that this correlates to potential emissions.
Detailed evaluation of different types of contaminants and the severity of their effects are
beyond the scope. Other examples are the Life-Cycle e-Valuation by Lang-Koetz et al (2008)
and the Environmental Effect Analysis (EEA) by Lindahl & Tingström (2001). We see
several similarities among these approaches and LCBROM, for example, the qualitative life
cycle-based questions that identify pathways for a more sustainable innovation.
Additionally, the EEA framework explicitly states that the assessment is designed to be
carried out in a multifunctional team, which aligns with LCBROM in that sense that a small
team of experts is recommended to be involved. Specifically, a three-person team is
recommended in which competences of LCA, risk assessment, and technology systems are
required.

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2025-p93rp-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0007-7563-9334 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC 4.0

The main characteristic that distinguishes LCBROM from other qualitative and/or semiqualitative life cycle-based assessment tools is the O in LCBROM, i.e., the mapping of
opportunities. We have found that the inclusion of opportunities in the assessments open
up the interest of the problem- and technology owners to put resources on performing
human health- and environmental assessments in early innovation. With an opportunity
mapping, one can not only reduce the obvious hot spots of the innovation but also identify
no-goes that the benchmark technology has been locked into. Additionally, it allows for
identification of multiple uses of the innovation and/or prolonged life cycle of material
within the technology. Another characteristic that distinguishes LCBROM from other
approaches is that its result is presented in an easy-to-understand format using a MET
matrix. That facilitates a quick and transparent result communication to decision-makers
and other experts, which also allows for further improvements via iterations through quick
feedback routes. The latter has been tested in a couple of case studies with a positive
response.
During the development of the method and its application in case studies, it became clear
that the formalized stepwise approach and defined input information facilitated the
execution of the method. The MET matrix is intuitive and easy to understand, which is
important as there is a strong need for tools that can be used by small and medium-sized
enterprises (SMEs). Although SMEs may not have the resources and/or competence to carry
out an LCBROM themselves, SMEs possess a technological expertise that is essential in the
execution of an LCBROM.
A well-thought-out and defined working group is crucial to obtain a successful LCBROM as
there must be a common understanding and driving force for performing the assessment as
well as the possibility to get access to the right information. A common understanding of
the strengths and limitations of LCBROM is important to establish early on. Additionally, to
derive at a successful LCBROM, non-disclosure agreements may have to be signed. If no
such agreement is signed, it can be difficult to identify risks and opportunities if there is
resistance in sharing sensitive information. However, if non-disclosure agreements are
signed, it may be difficult to publish the results from the assessment, which ultimately may
hinder further development of the method itself. To solve such an issue, the LCBROM
practitioners are recommended to carry out the assessment as far as possible using the
shared information and present the result to the technology- and problem owner. While
doing so, it is important that the result is communicated in a way that clearly points at the
relation between uncertainty and data gaps. It should also be explained that more reliable
results will come with more transparent information sharing.
Further work
Although the concept of MET matrix is old, the use of it in combination with a life cyclethinking for the purpose of assessing innovations at low TRL is new. For that reason, the
LCBROM method has several areas for improvements, and some are planned to be tested
shortly. An example of such an improvement is the expansion of the MET matrix into a
METES matrix: Material, Energy, Toxicity, Economy and Social aspects. Even though the
socio-economic assessment is marked as optional in the SSbD framework (step 5), it is of
interest to test out LCBROM for that purpose as well since the tools does not necessarily
have to be used in an SSbD context.

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2025-p93rp-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0007-7563-9334 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC 4.0

As many other environmental assessments, it is tricky to summarize the result in a way that
is easy to communicate. As of now, the documented result of an LCBROM is the MET
matrix. To facilitate communication, the information written in the matrix must be selfexplanatory in that sense that the reader should not have to consult the bulk text of the
report to understand the results. Alternative ways of presenting the results from an
LCBROM assessment must be investigated to further improve its accessibility and
understandability for non-experts.
Beyond Mistra TerraClean, the LCBROM method will be revised and tested in the EU
funded research programme BioSusTex with a focus on new chemical raw material and
process developments for the textile sector (https://www.biosustex.eu/).
Conclusions
In this article we propose a qualitative screening approach that can be used to support SSbD
assessments. It may be used both prior an SSbD assessment to facilitate its scoping process,
as well as serving valuable input to the two phases (the (re)design phase and the safety and
sustainability assessment) of the SSbD framework. Additionally, the tool can be used in the
environmental sustainability assessment (step 4) in early innovation when there are not
enough data to perform a quantitative LCA.
The method offers a structure that facilitates the identification of the foreseen most relevant
issues in a comprehensive manner without having to dig into details. It requires a joint
collaboration between a number of different experts and can be applied to most technology
fields with relatively low cost in terms of time and money.
LCBROM has been successfully applied in four case studies to materials and technologies
that are in the early innovation stage. The main learning from its development and
application is the importance of having a state-of-art benchmark and/or a specific case to
relate the innovation to for opportunity identification. If no such reference is established,
opportunities can only be identified by considering a scenario where no action is made at
all.
Acknowledgement
We thank Mistra for financial support in the research programme Mistra TerraClean II
(project number 2015/31) and in the programme Mistra SafeChem (project number 18/21).
We also thank the European Commission for financial support of the project BioSusTex (No
101135372). We also thank Nilay Elginoz Kanat at IVL Swedish Environmental Research
Institute for performing a first external review.
References

Blessing, L. T. M., & Chakrabarti, A. (Eds.). (2009). DRM: A Design Reseach Methodology.
In DRM, a Design Research Methodology (pp. 13–42). Springer.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-84882-587-1_2

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2025-p93rp-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0007-7563-9334 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC 4.0

Blomsma, F., Pieroni, M., Kravchenko, M., Pigosso, D. C. A., Hildenbrand, J., Kristinsdottir,
A. R., Kristoffersen, E., Shahbazi, S., Nielsen, K. D., Jönbrink, A.-K., Li, J., Wiik, C., &
McAloone, T. C. (2019). Developing a circular strategies framework for
manufacturing companies to support circular economy-oriented innovation. Journal
of Cleaner Production, 241, 118271. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.118271
Buyle, M., Audenaert, A., Billen, P., Boonen, K., & Passel, S. (2019). The Future of Ex-Ante
LCA? Lessons Learned and Practical Recommendations. Sustainability, 11, 5456.
https://doi.org/10.3390/su11195456
Caldeira, C., Farcal, L., Garmendia, I., Mancini, L., Tosches, D., antonio, amelio, Rasmussen,
K., Rauscher, H., Riego Sintes, J., & Sala, S. (2022). Safe and Sustainable by Design
chemicals and materials Framework for the definition of criteria and evaluation procedure for
chemicals and materials (No. JRC128591). Publications Office of the European Union.
https://doi.org/10.2760/487955
European Commission. (2020). Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability Towards a Toxic-Free
Environment.
Graedel, T. E., Allenby, B. R., & ComrieΕ, P. R. (1995). Matrix Approaches to Abridged Life
Cycle Assessment. Environmental Science & Technology, 29(3), 134A-139A.
https://doi.org/10.1021/es00003a751
Hetherington, A. C., Borrion, A. L., Griffiths, O. G., & McManus, M. C. (2014). Use of LCA
as a development tool within early research: Challenges and issues across different
sectors. The International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment, 19(1), 130–143.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11367-013-0627-8
Lang-Koetz, C., Beucker, S., & Heubach, D. (2008). Estimating Environmental Impact in the
Early Stages of the Product Innovation Process. In S. Schaltegger, M. Bennett, R. L.
Burritt, & C. Jasch (Eds.), Environmental Management Accounting for Cleaner
Production (pp. 49–64). Springer Netherlands. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-40208913-8_3

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2025-p93rp-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0007-7563-9334 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC 4.0

Lindahl, M., & Tingström, J. (2001). A small textbook on: Environmental Effect Analysis.
Department of Technology, University of Kalmar, Sweden.
https://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:liu:diva-87257
Moniruzzaman Moni, S., Mahmud, R., High, K., & Carbajales-Dale, M. (2019). Life cycle
assessment of emerging technologies: A review. Journal of Industrial Ecology, 2019.
https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.12965
Navarro, J., & Zhao, F. (2014). Life-Cycle Assessment of the Production of Rare-Earth
Elements for Energy Applications: A Review. Frontiers in Energy Research, 2.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fenrg.2014.00045
Piccinno, F., Hischier, R., Seeger, S., & Som, C. (2016). From laboratory to industrial scale: A
scale-up framework for chemical processes in life cycle assessment studies. Journal of
Cleaner Production, 135, 1085–1097. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.06.164
Pizzol, L., Livieri, A., Salieri, B., Farcal, L., Soeteman-Hernández, L. G., Rauscher, H., Zabeo,
A., Blosi, M., Costa, A. L., Peijnenburg, W., Stoycheva, S., Hunt, N., López-Tendero,
M. J., Salgado, C., Reinosa, J. J., Fernández, J. F., & Hristozov, D. (2023). Screening
level approach to support companies in making safe and sustainable by design
decisions at the early stages of innovation. Cleaner Environmental Systems, 10, 100132.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cesys.2023.100132
Ritthof, M., Rohn, H., Liedtke, C., & Merten, T. (2023, May 30). Calculating MIPS - Resource
productivity of products and services. Wuppertal Institute for Climate, Environment,
Energy. https://wupperinst.org/en/a/wi/a/s/ad/584
Schreiber, A., Marx, J., & Zapp, P. (2021). Life Cycle Assessment studies of rare earths
production—Findings from a systematic review. Science of The Total Environment,
791, 148257. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.148257
Thonemann, N., Kerps, A., & Maga, D. (2020). How to Conduct Prospective Life Cycle
Assessment for Emerging Technologies? A Systematic Review and Methodological
Guidance. Sustainability, 12, 1192. https://doi.org/10.3390/su12031192

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2025-p93rp-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0007-7563-9334 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC 4.0

Turgeon, K., Boulanger, J.-F., & Bazin, C. (2023). Simulation of Solvent Extraction Circuits
for the Separation of Rare Earth Elements. Minerals, 13(6), Article 6.
https://doi.org/10.3390/min13060714
Vahidi, E., & Zhao, F. (2016). Life Cycle Analysis for Solvent Extraction of Rare Earth
Elements from Aqueous Solutions. In Rewas 2016: Towards Materials Resource
Sustainability (pp. 113–120). https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119275039.ch17
Vahidi, E., & Zhao, F. (2017). Environmental life cycle assessment on the separation of rare
earth oxides through solvent extraction. Journal of Environmental Management, 203,
255–263. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2017.07.076

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2025-p93rp-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0007-7563-9334 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC 4.0

