qNMR fluorine pollution analysis: perspectives on PFAS
exposure characterisation using 19F NMR
1

1

Laura Duciel , Julia Asencio Hernandez ,
2
1
Marc-André Delsuc , Anne Briot-Dietsch ⋆
iD

iD

iD

iD

1

CASC4DE NMR lab, Illkirch, France
IGBMC, Illkirch, France
⋆
Corresponding author: anne.briot-dietsch@casc4de.eu
2

24 April 2025

Abstract

The presence of anthropogenic fluorinated pollutants in the environment, particularly per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances
(PFAS), is an increasing concern. The need for untargeted analytical methods is becoming increasingly critical to
comprehensively assess environmental contamination. Classical approaches include targeted searches for marker molecules,
for which standard references must be available or total fluorine estimation without individual species identification. Given
the diversity of commercially compounds, and their possible degradation products, it appears impossible to obtain a global
view of environmental fluorinated species.
We present investigation to highlight the potential of liquid state 19 F-Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) using broadband
acquisition and advocate it as a complementary untargeted routine strategy for obtaining additional information alongside
existing methods. We introduce a repertoire of 1D and 2D NMR experiments allowing to quantify efficiently all detected
fluorinated molecules in a given matrix. The specific problems of 19 F-NMR at high magnetic field are exposed, notably
the difficulty of exciting and detecting a large broadband spectral width tackled thanks to adapted pulse sequences.
Acquisition parameters have been optimized for quantification accuracy and robustness of the proposed techniques against
miss-calibration. Despite limited sensitivity compared to others approaches, 19 F-NMR insures minimal sample treatment
and few handling constraints.
Through real-world case studies from consumer products to PFAS-contaminated environments, we demonstrate that
19
F-NMR is not only suitable for quantification, but a powerful tool for the comprehensive detection of both known and
unexpected fluorinated species in environmental samples, with for instance LOD down to 20 µg/L for trifluoroacetic acid
(TFA).
Keywords
19
F NMR, fluorinated pollutants diagnosis, PFAS, nontarget analysis, broadband NMR, quantitative NMR, total organic
fluorine
Abbreviations Please note that PFAS Abbreviations stands for
per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances, including their acid forms,
salts, and related substances; AFFF, aqueous film forming foam;
ANSES, agence nationale de sécurité sanitaire de l’alimentation,
de l’environnement et du travail; AOF, adsorbable organic fluorine;
CEC, contaminant of emerging concern; CIC, combustion ion
chromatography; COSY, correlated spectroscopy; DMSO, dimethyl
sulfoxide; DOSY, diffusion ordered spectroscopy; ECHA, European
chemicals agency; EOF, extractable organic fluorine; FASA,
perfluoroalkyl sulfonamide; FID, free induction decay; FTCA,
fluorotelomer carboxylic acid; FTOH, fluorotelomer alcohol; FTSA,
fluorotelomer sulfonic acid; HFPO-DA, hexafluoropropylene oxidedimer acid, 2,3,3,3-tetrafluoro-2-(heptafluoropropoxy)propanoic
acid or chemicals from GenX trademark also known as FRD-903;
HFPO-TA, hexafluoropropylene oxide-trimer acid, perfluoro-2,5dimethyl-3,6-dioxanonanoic acid; HFPO-TeA, hexafluoropropylene
oxide tetramer acid; HMQC, heteronuclear multiple quantum
correlation; LC-MS/MS, liquid chromatography coupled to tandem
mass spectrometry; LED, longitudinal eddy delay; LOD, limit of
detection; LOQ, limit of quantification; MS, mass spectrometry;

NMR, nuclear magnetic resonance; OECD, organisation for
economic co-operation and development; PFAS, poly- and
perfluorinated substance; PFBA, perfluorinated butyric acid; PFCA,
perfluorinated carboxylic acid; PFECA, perfluoropolyether carboxylic
acid; PFG, pulsed field gradient; PFHxS, perfluorohexanesulfonic
acid; PFMOPrA, perfluoro-3-methoxypropanoic acid; PFOA,
perfluorooctanoic acid; PFOS, perfluorooctanesulfonic acid; PFPA,
perfluorinated phosphonic acid; PFSA, perfluorinated sulfonic
acid; PTFE, polytetrafluoroethylene; POP, persistent organic
pollutant; qNMR, quantitative nuclear magnetic resonance;
REACH, registration, evaluation, authorisation and restriction
of chemicals; SNR, signal to noise ratio; SPIKE, spectrometry
processing innovative kernel; SOFAST, selective optimized flip
angle short transient; SW, spectral width; TFA, trifluoroacetic acid;
UNEP, United Nations environment programme; USEPA, United
States environmental protection agency.

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2025-hdnzl-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-7993-1323 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC 4.0

2
1

Briot-Dietsch et al.
HN

1.1

A small but strong element

Fluorine is a key element, more abundant in the Earth’s crust
than sulfur or zinc. It is unknown to the biologist because there
is nearly no fluorine metabolism in any living organism. To the
chemist, it is however a favourite element, with the highest
electronegativity and a strong C-F bound that provides specific
properties and extreme resistance to harsh conditions.1 Due
to these characteristics, fluorine has occupied a unique place
in the chemist’s toolbox over the past century.2 Indeed, the
use of fluorine in pharmaceutical, agrochemical, and repellent
or nonstick finishes industries has been extensively developed
since at least the 1950’s.
Today Solvay, a major player in the chemical industry,
estimates that "ca. 30% of drugs and 50% of crop protection
products under development contain fluorine".3 Indeed,
it is already present inside our houses in the form of
drugs such as antibiotics ciprofloxacin (Ciflox® , Cipro® )
or levofloxacin (Levaquin® , Tavanic® ), nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs niflumic acid (Nifluril® ) or celecoxib
(Celebrex® ), antidepressant fluoxetine (Prozac® ), seasonal
allergic rhinitis relieving fluticasone propionate (Dymista® )
and the lipid lowering agent atorvastatin (Lipitor® )...
Roughly one in five medications currently on the market
are fluoropharmaceuticals.4; 5; 6; 7 Regarding agrochemical
products newly developed in the last decade more than 60%
contain a fluorine moiety.8; 9 Not to mention its historical use
in poly- and perfluorinated substances (PFAS) and derivated
polymer films and membranes blockbusters Teflon® , Nafion® ,
Scotchgard® (Figure 1)...

1.2

O
NH2
S
O

Fluorine world

PFAS, the « Forever Chemicals »

PFAS are a class of synthetic fluorine-based chemicals10
closely scrutinized, used in high-tech applications but now
considered to be toxic environmental pollutants and designated
as contaminants of emerging concern (CEC) and persistent
organic pollutants (POP).11; 12
Discovered in the 1930’s, their usage went largely
unregulated until the early 2000’s.13 Due to characteristics
of fluorine, these poly- and perfluorinated substances show
remarkable repellent or nonstick properties which are widely
used by the industry in everyday objects: water repellent gear,
stain resistant fabric, food packaging, non-stick cookware,
personal care products, Aqueous Film-Forming Foam (AFFF)
used for firefighting.13; 14 Applications extend across multiple
sectors.15 First used in the military field during the Second
World War, in connection with work on the atomic bomb, PFAS
have subsequently fuelled significant industrial development,
with numerous civil and domestic applications.16; 17 The use
of perfluorinated compound into materials has enhanced
their performance providing exceptional chemical resistance
and impermeability. They are even used in environmental
engineering solutions such as landfill liners, storage tanks, and
industrial barriers designed to prevent soil and groundwater
contamination.14
Among emblematic compounds are perfluorooctanoic acid
(PFOA), primary ingredient in Teflon® , perfluorooctanesulfonic
R
acid (PFOS), historical component of Scotchgard⃝
, and then
the fluoroether, hexafluoropropylene oxide-dimer acid (HFPO-

N

F
F
F

N
OH

F
O

N

O

ciprofloxacine (Ciflox®, Cipro®)

celecoxib (Celebrex®)

OH OH O
O

N

N

O
OH

O

O

O

NH

O
S

F

H
F

H

O

F

F

atorvastatine (Lipitor®)
N
Cl
F
F

N
N
Cl

NH2

F F
F
S
O

fluticasone propionate (Dymista®)
F
F

F
S
N N

O
N

F

F

fipronil (Regent®)

F
F

O

F F F F F F
COOH
F F F F F F F

PFOA (Teflon® historical ingredient)
F F
F
F

O
F

F F
F

F

F
F

F F F F F F F
SO3H
F F F F F F F F

PFOS (Scotchgard® & fire fighting foam)

O
OH

F

flufenacet (Starfire®)

F

F
F

HPFO-DA, GenX chemical
(PFOA alternative)

F F F F F F

O
S
OH
F
F
F
F
O
F

PFHxS
(PFOS alternative)

Figure 1. Molecular structure of some typical man-made fluorinated
compounds: medicines; agrochemicals; historical perfluorinated
compounds used in polymer films applications, i.e. perfluorooctanoic
acid (PFOA) and perfluorooctanesulfonic acid (PFOS); their shorterchain alternatives, i.e. hexafluoropropylene oxide-dimer acid (HFPODA) and perfluorohexanesulfonic acid (PFHxS).

DA) and its ammonium salt referred to as “GenX chemicals”,
developed as a safer alternative but finally more toxic than the
PFOA they were supposed to replace18; 19 and leading to the
so-called regrettable substitution phenomenon20 (Figure 1). It
is estimated that "more than a megaton of PFAS is produced
yearly, and thousands of PFAS wind up in end-use products",21
and that "around 4.4 million tonnes of PFAS would end up
in the environment over the next 30 years unless action is
taken".22
As of today, more than 10 000 highly fluorinated
compounds have been inventoried by the United States
environmental protection agency (USEPA)23 and proposed
in early 2023 for restriction by European chemicals agency
(ECHA).22 The original 2018 definition of the organisation
for economic co-operation and development (OECD) defined
PFAS as molecules containing three or more fully fluorinated
carbons connected to each other or two such carbons linked by

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2025-hdnzl-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-7993-1323 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC 4.0

qNMR fluorine pollution analysis: perspectives on PFAS exposure characterisation using 19 F NMR
an ether group. In 2021, the USEPA broadened this definition to
also include compounds with two adjacent fluorinated carbon.
As highly fluorinated PFAS are thermally and chemically
stable, they are resistant to most biological and chemical
degradation mechanisms.24 Therefore, these compounds
have accumulated in ecosystems. They are considered as
POP as either because they are persistent themselves or
degrade to persistent PFAS. Environmental studies have
already shown the presence of PFAS in soil, sediments, water
resources and wildlife, leading to a growing awareness of their
omnipresence.25; 26; 27 As a result of inadequate environmental
assessment frameworks for their monitoring, their study and
surveillance are relatively recent, even though they have
been accumulating in the environment for a longer time.
They are recognized as a major environmental and health
problem of global dimension. Indeed, all these molecules share
a common feature: they present a toxicity at relatively low
concentrations with confirmed impacts on human health, e.g.
carcinogenic, endocrine disrupting, reprotoxic, lowering birth
weight, accelerating puberty, affecting immunity and thyroid
activity, reducing vaccine response, damaging the liver and
kidney, leading to lipid and insulin dysregulation.28; 29; 30
Despite intensive works worldwide,31; 32; 30 the harsh reality
remains that there is no global remediation solution right
now, even new interesting approach to PFAS management
have recently emerged.33 Thus, their accumulation in
the environment and their potential for water or food
contamination raise concerns regarding their impact on human
health. Motivated by these concerns, regulations have emerged.
In 2001 the Stockholm Convention initiated by the United
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) Governing Council
has set guidelines to mitigate POP and has started to
enforce restrictions on PFOS (2009), on PFOA (2020) and
on perfluorohexanesulfonic acid (PFHxS) (2022).34 Now longchain (C9-21) perfluorinated carboxylic acids (PFCA) are also
being considered for inclusion. At European level, regulation
on the registration, evaluation, authorization, and restriction
of chemicals (REACH) has occurred for C9-14 PFCA and
derivatives in 2023 and now other PFAS are under evaluation.35
Since August 2023 the PFHxS group has been restricted by
the European POP Regulation. In United States, since 2021, a
framework "PFAS Strategic Roadmap" was set by the USEPA
detailing the agency’s regulatory plans from 2021 to 2024.36
Although scientists have now identified key points to
address the "PFAS problem",29; 37; 38 a real engagement of all
stakeholders—including scientists, consumers, authorities, and
manufacturers— is crucial to contain the magnitude of the
issue.39
Interestingly, the definition of PFAS remains a contentious
issue. In 2021, the OECD further broadened the definition
to include any compound containing at least one CF3
(trifluoromethyl) or CF2 (difluoromethylene) group.40 This
evolution drastically increases the number of recognized PFAS,
now estimated at nearly 15,000 compounds with this definition.
This reclassification means that many fluorinated pesticides,
like flufenacet, fipronil, flurochloridone, flutianil, isoxaflutole,
penthiopyrad, pyroxsulam... now fall within the PFAS family.
However, some advocate for a narrower focus on molecules with
many fluorine atoms, as these often exhibit specific properties
that make PFAS persistent and hazardous.

3

known
unknown (unexpected )

Targeted
Analysis
focus on known references

Whole content

Untargeted
Analysis
comprehensive analysis

Figure 2. Targeted versus untargeted approach for in-depth fluorine
content exploration. Untargeted approach is appropriate to detect
unexpected compounds and reduces biases as no prior knowledge
about the sample is needed. It can reveal the presence of unexpected
compounds that might be overlooked in a targeted analysis. However
the challenge lies in the identification process.

1.3

Fluorine pollution challenge

Fluorinated compounds, including PFAS, which have been
introduced to the market in large numbers, have a significant
impact on the environment. Over the past three decades,
the detection of these compounds in ecosystems and the
understanding of their hazardous effects have become more
pronounced characterizing pollution issues.41; 42 Overall the
regulatory landscape is evolving positively around the world to
assess and mitigate their environmental and health impacts.
However, to address existing issues, and to
comprehensively assess and map risks, it is necessary to
have a robust, untargeted, holistic, easy-to-handle approach
allowing analyses in number. Pollution analysis is a complex
issue that demands handling an extensive diversity of pollutant
species (known, emerging, all continually being identified)
and few scientific knowledge about their toxicity43 . This
approach has to deal with extreme concentrations (very
low or very high ones), requiring either highly sensitive or
robust detection methods for heavily contaminated samples.
Large data collections are needed as well to accurately assess
pollution levels and sources as environmental conditions can
significantly vary and affect dispersion and concentration.
Finally, potential matrix effects on detection and quantification
of the targeted pollutants may require prior complex sample
preparation and purification techniques.44 Addressing these
challenges is crucial for accurate pollution assessment and
further effective remediation.
Targeted and untargeted analysis methods are the two
approaches in analytical chemistry, each serving distinct
purposes in the identification and quantification of compounds

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2025-hdnzl-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-7993-1323 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC 4.0

4

Briot-Dietsch et al.

(Figure 2). On the one hand, targeted approach is more of
an a priori knowledge method since it involves measuring a
predetermined set of previously characterized analytes. While
it facilitates the optimization of analytical protocols, it performs
badly in adapting to the multiple potential scenarios of PFAS
and fluorochemicals pollution. On the other hand, untargeted
approach is a global and comprehensive measurement of both
known and unknown compounds. It involves investigating
pollution as a whole, even if this may necessitate making
assumptions and raising challenging identification issues.
Currently, there is no complete untargeted technique
for detecting, identifying and quantifying PFAS and
fluorochemical pollutants. Existing routines primarily rely
on Liquid Chromatography coupled with tandem Mass
Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).45; 46; 47; 48; 49; 50 This targeted
approach encounters challenges such as the limited availability
of authentic reference standards, approximately 150 for PFAS
as of today compared to the estimated 10,000 existing PFAS
compounds. LC-MS/MS methods are also facing troubles
such as time-consuming preparations, treatments that may
alter sample content, matrix effects, sample extraction limited
by solvents mixture compatibility or overly contaminated
samples.44; 51 On the positive side, the Limit of Quantification
(LOQ) of LC-MS/MS typically reaches the low-ng/L and
low-ng/g range, except for surface water, where it is usually
sub-50 ng/L, and for wastewater or effluents, where it is often
sub-100 ng/L, due to interference from matrix components.
In fact, LOQ typically depends on the instrument, the specific
PFAS being analysed, and the sample matrix. Short-chain
PFAS, like perfluorinated butyric acid (PFBA), often have
higher LOQ due to their lower ionization efficiency. Regarding
suspect screening using high-resolution mass spectrometry to
detect known PFAS without requiring reference standards,
the approach bridges targeted and non-targeted analysis to
identify PFAS based on accurate mass, retention time, and
MS/MS fragmentation patterns. It can allow for detecting
more fluorinated compounds beyond the limited list covered
by targeted methods.52 Nevertheless it remains suspect list
dependent, and involves complex data processing and limited
structural confirmation (isomers).
In contrast, untargeted methods, relying on adsorptive
phases like Adsorbable Organic Fluorine (AOF)53 or
Extractable Organic Fluorine (EOF) and use combustion
ion chromatography (CIC) to mineralize and quantify organic
fluorine, provide a broad screening approach for detecting
fluorinated organic compounds (and eventually residual
inorganic fluoride not removed during preparation).54 EOF,
using a polymeric cartridge (e.g., weak anion exchange type)
as the adsorbing phase and suitable solvents, can offer insights
on a broad range of fluorinated species. AOF provides a
collective assessment of all fluorinated compounds that can
adsorb onto activated carbon, including PFAS, and captures all
those not specifically regulated or less studied, and is expected
to minimize the co-extraction of inorganic fluorides. However,
the lack of specificity of these sum parameters means that
they cannot identify which particular PFAS or fluorinated
compounds are present, making it impossible to provide
detailed risk assessments. Furthermore, they are limited by
matrix effects, such as interference from complex samples like
wastewater or soil and are unable to detect non-adsorbable or
volatile fluorinated compounds. The LOQ of AOF and EOF
depends on the specific analytical method, instrumentation,

Total Fluorine
F liquid-NMR observable

19

Soluble Fluorine
Organic Fluorine
including non-PFAS
fluorinated organics

Inorganic
Fluoride

PFAS
target
PFAS

Non Soluble
Fluorine

Inorganic

Organic

Figure 3. Diagram illustrating total fluorine analysis, highlighting
the partitioning of fluorine species in a sample. Soluble fractions
are observable by 19 F NMR, distinguishing PFAS within the soluble
fraction and target PFAS typically analysed via LC-MS/MS.

and sample preparation process. Commonly these LOQ are
in the range of sub-µg/L in aqueous matrices (e.g., drinking
water, groundwater, or wastewater).
As of today, there is a critical need for a method that
not only targets individual chemicals but allows detection of
total fluorinated content: PFAS and eventually unexpected
others non-PFAS fluorinated contaminants or metabolites
present in the sample 29; 55 and quantification of total fluorine
parameter56 (Figure 3). Ideally, this technique should be
highly selective, i.e. targeting only PFAS while excluding
inorganic fluoride species, and comprehensive, capable of
detecting thousands of known and unknown PFAS with
sufficient recovery rates. In the present work, we propose to
consider 19 F nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) as a possible
approach for untargeted analysis to detect the presence of
fluorinated and perfluorinated species. In addition, 19 F NMR
can offer valuable structural information, offering a more
comprehensive understanding of contamination profiles by
revealing information about the implied species families. Such
an approach could facilitate the identification of broader
contamination patterns and contribute to more effective site
prioritization and investigation strategies.
2
2.1

NMR Approach of fluorine pollution diagnosis
19

F NMR, a powerful spectroscopy

Based on the magnetic properties of certain atomic nuclei,
NMR spectroscopy is a powerful analytical technique to unlock
physical, chemical, and biological properties of matter,57; 58; 59
from small organic molecules to complex biomolecules and
advanced materials. Because of its versatility and precision,
NMR is increasingly being recognized in the development of
international standards.60
NMR covers a broad range of molecules and provides
access to the molecular diversity while being inherently
quantitative, and naturally untargeted. While the properties of
NMR active nuclei such as 1 H, 13 C or 31 P may be familiar to
the reader, the 19 F was one of the very first spins studied in the
1950s57 and 19 F spectroscopy presents some specificities which
are presented below.

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2025-hdnzl-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-7993-1323 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC 4.0

qNMR fluorine pollution analysis: perspectives on PFAS exposure characterisation using 19 F NMR
nifluril

PFAS

fluticasone propionate

florfénicol

140

200

unknown (unexpected )
PFMOPrA

60

80

100

120

160

180

220

ppm

Figure 4. The large dispersion of chemical shifts in fluorine NMR
for example from ca. -55 ppm for -OCF3 groups of perfluoro-3methoxypropanoic acid (PFMOPrA ; among PFECA alternatives to
historical PFAS) to around -225 ppm for -CH2 F groups of florfenicol
(vet antibiotic). It implies strong experimental constraints to ensure
that no signals of interest are missed.

Sensitivity
With a 1/2 spin, a high gyromagnetic ratio (94% of 1 H) and a
100% isotopic abundance, 19 F NMR is theoretically only slightly
less sensitive than 1 H NMR. In addition, fluorine nuclei exhibit
relaxation times similar to those of protons, with T2 /T1 ratios
for 19 F close to 1.0, allowing the efficient acquisition of free
induction decays (FID). Long transverse spin-spin relaxation
T2 insures sharp signals, and gives access to homo- and heteronuclear J-coupling values.
This combination of high sensitivity, favourable relaxation
properties, 100% natural abundance of the magnetically active
fluorine-19 isotope and a total absence of natural background
noise makes fluorine’s overall sensitivity in practice better than
that of the proton.
Chemical shift range, J-couplings
Likewise, the electron-rich nature of fluorine (surrounded by 9
electrons, instead of one for hydrogen) makes the fluorine spin,
and its 19 F chemical shift, much more sensitive to the details
of its local environment and the structure of the molecule.
Therefore the range of fluorine chemical shifts is much more
extended for fluorine than for hydrogen. 19 F resonances span
700 ppm, with over 200 ppm specific to fluorinated organic
compounds, as detailed in W. R. Dolbier’s Guide to Fluorine
NMR for Organic Chemists 61 and illustrated in Figure 4.
The combination of a large chemical shift dispersion and
sharp signals, reduces signal overlap as compared to 1 H NMR,
and enables spectral separation even on similar groups, such
as the CF2 groups of long perfluoro-saturated chains of PFAS
compounds. Similarly, the large range of homo- and heteronuclear J-couplings61 is a source of structural information.
A drawback related to this wide spectral range is the
fact that even in a moderate magnetic field, the complete
range of possible 19 F signals cannot be easily covered in a
single experiment. For instance, on the 600 MHz instrument
used in this study, a 200 ppm range requires a spectral width
of 113 kHz, too large to be analysed using standard procedures.
Specificity
One of the main strengths of the NMR technique is its high
specificity as it only observes the signals from the studied
atomic nuclei. Thus, a 19 F spectrum detects all the fluorine in
a sample regardless of their chemical details but is blind to all

5

other elements (such as hydrogen and carbon). This is a strong
advantage that allows the development of fully untargeted
analyses. In addition, as most solvents do not contain fluorine,
they will not interfere with the 19 F NMR signal, allowing the
use of a broad variety of solvents. Thus, in contrast to 1 H
NMR, fully deuterated solvents are not necessary, except for a
small deuterium amount used to lock the spectrometer field.
Quantitativity
With proper experimental parameters, NMR allows direct
quantitative measurements as the observed signals are
proportional to the quantity of matter being analysed. The
area under the peak (or integral) of the NMR signals is a
direct determination of the molecular concentration in the
solution, provided that the experimental parameters affecting
accuracy and precision of the measure (e.g. delays, pulses, and
acquisition time) have been carefully calibrated and optimized.
Minimal sample preparation
Liquid NMR applications benefit from minimal and rapid
sample preparation, leading to reduced sample loss and a
maintained integrity of the analytes. Even for complex matrices,
a minimal filtration or a quick centrifugation after dissolution
is sufficient to remove suspended undissolved matter without
extensive processing. No necessary sample derivatization nor
sample specific standard requirements make NMR really
easy to operate. The use of disposable sample containers
effectively prevents from cross-sample contamination. It can
accommodate highly concentrated samples, so serial dilutions
are not required, reducing the risk of systematic error. NMR
stands out for its non-invasive nature as samples do not interact
directly with the instrument and can be recovered for later
operations. Additionally its high solvents compatibility is a
real advantage for dissolution, allowing for greater flexibility in
selecting solvents. This versatility is interesting when working
with complex formulations, facilitating the breakdown and
solubilization of challenging compounds.
In particular, Dimethyl Sulfoxide (DMSO) is often
a preferred option due to its excellent solvating ability.
This solvent dissolves both polar and nonpolar compounds,
which makes it particularly useful for extracting varieties
of compounds with favourable recovery rate, and especially
suitable for effective soil sample treatments, even USEPA
researchers have highlighted in 2023 degradation phenomenon
with 3 HPFO-DA family samples over their DMSO screening
stock of 205 PFAS, i.e. HPFO-DA, hexafluoropropylene oxide
trimer acid (HFPO-TA) and tetramer acid (HFPO-TeA).62
In our experience, unless when HFPO-DA degrades, it forms
a clean similar compound, likely Fluoroether E1, exhibiting
a typical -CHF- signal, which should not alter the final
quantification . Therefore, while DMSO is commonly used for
its solubility benefits, it’s always crucial to assess whether it’s
the most suitable choice for specific experiments and analytes.
Efficiency
NMR offers a comprehensive approach to quantitative and
untargeted analysis while standing out for its non-invasive
nature, minimal sample preparation requirements, single
calibration point, low matrix interference.
Most fluorine detection methods are based either on the
fluoride ion alone or on fluorinated organic molecules only.
19
F NMR allows the observation of both forms by solution

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2025-hdnzl-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-7993-1323 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC 4.0

Briot-Dietsch et al.

NMR, provided ionic forms are soluble. In addition, insoluble
forms can be analysed by solid-state NMR. The nature of
inorganic fluoride species found in the environment largely
depends on soil composition and environmental conditions
such as pH, temperature, and moisture levels, making their
solubility difficult to predict. Even when soluble, they differ
from the characteristic PFAS NMR fingerprint, which allows
clear distinction between these species.
As there is hardly any other fluorinated organic compounds
in the wild apart from the manufactured ones, the presence of
a signal in the NMR spectrum is almost always the signature
of some non-natural molecules.
Indeed, unlike other analytical techniques, 19 F NMR will
be able to detect all soluble fluorinated species present in
the studied sample offering promising perspectives in the
diagnosis of fluorinated pollutants even some sensitivity issues
are expected and further identification challenges (Figure 3).
In the two last decades 19 F NMR spectroscopy has gained
recognition63 in investigation of the conformations, dynamics
and interactions of biomacromolecules,64; 65; 66 ligand-based
NMR screening for drug discovery,67; 68 structure determination
of organic fluorine compounds,58 quality control69; 70 and for
environmental measurements of total PFAS71 and especially
recently with Camdzic72; 73 or Gauthier.74; 75 This study
aims to present further investigation and efforts to highlight
the potential of 19 F NMR using broadband acquisition and
advocate it as a complementary routine analytical strategy for
obtaining additional information alongside existing methods.

3
3.1

Optimisation & improvement in 19 F qNMR
measurements

(A)

(B)

10

Intensity

6

5

0

-5
-100

-50

0

50

Distance from O1

Figure 5. (A) OPERA-45 pulse shape designed by Coote et al..
Amplitude (in blue) and phase (in crimson) profile of the excitation
waveform (pulse duration of 80 µs with RF amplitude of 14 kHz);
(B) Experimental excitation profile measured by moving the carrier
frequency of the OPERA-45 pulse on a 1 mM PFOA sample
in DMSO-d6 under optimized conditions. The −CF3 NMR signal
intensity is consistent across a 120 kHz range of frequencies, meaning
the excitation is uniform throughout the spectrum range.

Large spectral range

The wide range of chemical shifts of 19 F signals creates two
difficulties: unbiased excitation and faithful detection of all the
resonances, both make it difficult to insure reliable quantitative
measurements, in particular at high magnetic fields.
The major difficulty is to insure a correct excitation of a
wide spectral width. It is well known that a square excitation
pulse results in a limited excitation bandwidth, which is
inversely proportional to its duration. Amplitude and phase
distortions arise due to off-resonance effects,76; 77 becoming
more pronounced as the signal deviates further from the pulse
carrier. As a result, only the center of the excitation window
can be used reliably. For instance, as a rule of thumb for
quantitative measurements, a pulse of 15 µsec is considered
to only faithfully excite a 25 to 50 kHz region centered on
the pulse carrier, which is far from being sufficient for our
purpose. Several solutions are known to circumvent this
difficulty,78; 79; 80; 81; 82 but present deficiencies in the presence
of fast decaying signals or large J-couplings, due to their long
duration.
In order to address these issues we chose to use the OPERA
pulse approach (Optimizing Phase of Excitation Removes
Artifacts), a recent broadband excitation scheme presented
by Coote et al 83 (see Figure 5A). It has been designed using
optimal control theory to reduce pulse duration while insuring
no second order phase correction as observed with standard
chirp pulses. The pulse has been optimized for several flip
angles, and we chose to use the 45 degrees pulse definition

which seems well adapted to quantitative studies. After phase
correction, the flat excitation profile and the flat baseline
permits reliable quantitative measurements (see Figure 5).
Experimental data on the OPERA-45 excitation pulse
show a high-fidelity excitation over a 120 kHz bandwidth and
robustness to power miss-calibration over 100 kHz (presented in
the Supporting Information 1). In addition, the short duration
of the OPERA-45 pulse (80 µsec) can suppress J-modulation
artifacts for compounds with significant F-F coupling such as
long chain PFAS compounds.
These features make it possible, through a one-shot
experiment, to access the whole chemical information that
would otherwise remain difficult to observe, as exemplified with
a model compound in Figure 6. The single molecule Vertrel™
exhibits a chemical shift dispersion extending to 146.7 ppm.
Moreover a reliable quantitation is achievable on this range, the
uniform excitation of OPERA-45 ensuring that all integrated
peaks in the spectrum are accurate and reliable.
In addition, on most spectrometers there is a marked loss
of detection quality associated with the high sampling rates
required for detection of large spectral widths, and on our 600
MHz instrument, this happens for widths larger than 100 kHz.
This corresponds to a 177 ppm range, and implies that at least
two acquisitions have to be made to cover the whole range
of 200 ppm for possible organic fluorine signals. Instead, we
decided to select a single region spanning from -50 ppm to 227 ppm, covering most of the possible signals, and to resort
to additional measurements when needed.

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2025-hdnzl-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-7993-1323 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC 4.0

qNMR fluorine pollution analysis: perspectives on PFAS exposure characterisation using 19 F NMR

CF3

CF2

CHF

120

-60

-80

-100

-120

-140

7

-160

-180

-200

110

ppm

100

90

-220

ppm

Figure 6. Broadband 19 F acquisition using OPERA-45 excitation,
on 2H,3H-decafluoropentane 180 mM in DMSO-d6 (Vertrel™,
technical grade, used as a zero ozone-depletion alternative to hydro
chlorofluorocarbons). Primary and secondary alkyl fluorides exhibit
significantly different shielding along the carbon backbone showing
a chemical shifts dispersion of 146.7 ppm from -CF3 moiety at
-74.8 ppm to -CHF- groups around -221.5 ppm. With 2 chiral
centers, and the CF2 diastereotopic fluorines, NMR spectrum shows
two distinct resonances profiles whose separation reflects proportion
of some Vertrel stereoisomers. Acquisition in a single shot in
quantitative conditions. Attributions are made using to 19 F-13 C
HMQC experiment in Figure 8.

3.2

2D experiments

Implementing two-dimensional NMR experiments is an
important advantage for the characterization of unknown
detected molecules.84; 85 Moreover, detecting fluorinated
carbons in 13 C spectra can be challenging, especially when the
signal-to-noise ratio is low, as their signals are spread across
multiple lines and may blend into background noise. Figure 7
presents 13 C spectrum of our model compound (2H,3Hdecafluoropentane, Vertrel™) revealing complex overlapping
multiplets. An interesting approach could be to perform a 19 F13
C HMQC experiment with 19 F–19 F decoupling (see below,
OPERA-HMQC paragraph).
2D NMR can reveal signals that overlap in 1D NMR
spectroscopy because of similar resonant frequencies and is
indicative of mutually interacting spatial arrangements. A suite
of NMR 2D 19 F–19 F and 19 F–13 C correlation experiments was
implemented in the goal of providing a variety of experiments
that will help interpret the spectra and elucidate the structure
of the carbon backbone. The collected 19 F chemical shifts,
along with the JHF and JCF coupling constants provide a
wealth of information as exemplified in Figure 8. With the
instrument generation that we use, the π2 version of the
OPERA pulse cannot be implemented because of too stringent
timing constraints. As a consequence, we had to explore the
possibilities left when using only the OPERA-45 version. With
the main concern of PFAS pollution studies, in particular the
identification of involved pollutants, we decided to principally
implement the following 2D-experiments: 19 F-13 C correlation,
19 19
F- F correlation and 19 F DOSY.

Figure 7. 13 C spectra of 2H,3H-decafluoropentane 180 mM in
DMSO-d6 (Vertrel™). Fluorinated carbons in 13 C spectra can be
difficult to assign, particularly due to J-couplings, their signals spread
across multiple lines and may even merge with background noise.
Assignment was made from the HMQC experiment.

OPERA-HMQC
The 19 F- 13 C 2D-correlation was implemented on the basis of
the SOFAST HMQC (Selective Optimized Flip Angle Short
Transient Heteronuclear Multiple Quantum Correlation)86
experience because of its high sensitivity and restrained number
of π2 19 F pulses resulting in shorter experimental time compared
to conventional HSQC. 19 F π pulses were implemented
using the CHIRP technique (Frequency-modulated pulse, see
Supporting Information 2).79
For our model compound the spectrum obtained is shown
in Figure 8. Cross peaks show the various couplings along the
backbone of the carbon chain. Both 1 JCF and 2 JCF coupling
are observed. As expected, a carbon attached fluorine is
characterized with a large 19 F–13 C 1 J-coupling from 194 Hz
to 281 Hz. HMQC enables clear distinction between the two
methyl groups by examining two-bond coupling cross-peaks,
aiding in the structural assignment of the molecule’s various
moieties
OPERA-COSY 45
The pulsed field gradient-enhanced COSY 4587 was naturally
used to implement 19 F-19 F correlation enabling fast data
collection while improving sensitivity and resolution
(Frequency-modulated pulse, see Supporting Information
4). COSY 45 present the advantage of useful cross-correlation
patterns to identify and interpret the interactions between
fluorines within a molecule and to decipher multiple long
range correlations, notably in PFAS (illustrated in Supporting
Information 5 with PFOA). It is straightforward to implement
and to use, with no modification to the standard sequence but
the replacement of both pulses with OPERA-45, and works as
expected.
Geminal homonuclear 19 F-19 F J-coupling constants are
very large (here 288 Hz), but even though the coupling
constants diminish very quickly with the number of bonds,
long-range J-couplings through even up to 5 bonds (2 J, 3 J, 4 J
or 5 J) are not uncommon, as shown in Figure 9 in our model
compound. For this reason, we used an additional delay τ
in the 19 F-COSY in order to tune the range of detected J-values.

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2025-hdnzl-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-7993-1323 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC 4.0

80

8

Briot-Dietsch et al.
-128.4

-122.0

F

(a)

118,1

-220.6

F(b2) H

F(b1)
111,0

82,7

F (d)
83.6

F(e)

121,6

F(a)
F(e) F(a)

F(a)

F(b2)
-82.3

F (b1)

F(c)

H

F(e)

F(e)

-221.5

F(e) F(a)
F(b2)

-74.8

F(d) F(c)

19 F

F (b1)

80

F(d) F(c)

19 F

C(c)
C(d)

F(c)

-220

F(d)

90

100
(F1) ppm

(F1) ppm

-180

110

F (b1)

-140
5

J

F (b2)

C(b)
-100

F(a)

C(a)
C(e)
-60

-80

-100

-120

-140

-160

-180

-200

-220

OPERA-DOSY
The 19 F DOSY experiment was implemented with the standard
longitudinal eddy delay (LED) experiment88; 89 which does not
require the use on π pulses (see Supporting Information 6). The
set-up where only the final excitation pulse is implemented as
an OPERA pulse was found to be the most sensitive.
3.3

Quantitative measure

As mentioned above, a reliable quantitative experiment requires
properly tuned experimental parameters. To this end, we
measured the T1 relaxation values of the PFOA molecule in
10% deuterated DMSO using both the saturation recovery
and inversion recovery (IR) approaches (available in Supporting
Information 8 and 9). The resulting values range from 0.35 to
0.86 s, the slowest relaxation time being found for the terminal CF3 moiety and the -CF2 moiety located alpha to the functional
group experiences faster longitudinal relaxation T1 at 0.35 s.
When adding scans in a repetitive acquisition, saturation
due to the excitation pulse reduces the intensity of the signal,

19 F
-60

(F2 ) ppm

Figure 8. Broadband 19 F-13 C HMQC on 2H,3H-decafluoropentane
180 mM in DMSO-d6 (Vertrel™). Coupling patterns are enlarged
for 1 JCF coupling. This type of coupling is relatively strong for
fluorine-carbon bonds, making it detectable and allow to confirm
connectivity. 1 JCF couplings were extracted from the F2-dimension:
1J
1
1
1
CFa =281 Hz, JCFe =281 Hz, JCFb1 =273 Hz, JCFb2 =255 Hz,
1J
1J
=203
Hz,
=194
Hz.
HMQC
allows
precise
differentiation
CFc
CFd
of the two methyl groups when we consider two-bond coupling crosspeaks circled in green between the fluorine nucleus F(a) at -82.3 ppm
and the carbon nucleus C(b) at 111.0 ppm, between the fluorine
nucleus F(e) at -74.8 ppm and the carbon nucleus C(d) at 83.6 ppm,
and between the fluorine nucleus F(b) around -125 ppm and the
carbon nucleus C(a) at 118,1 ppm. Artefact cross-peak around 100
pm.

F(e)

-60

13 C

-80

-100

-120

-140

-160

-180

-200

-220

(F2 ) ppm

Figure 9. Broadband 19 F-19 F COSY 45 on 2H,3H-decafluoropentane
180 mM in DMSO-d6 (Vertrel™). Coupling patterns are enlarged.
Purple zoom is showing the major and minor forms of this compound
with two chiral centres. Long-range 19 F-19 F J-couplings occur over
multiple bonds. While vicinal (3 J) and geminal (2 J) couplings are
most common, long-range couplings extend over five bounds (5 J).

and T1 relaxation imposes a minimal experimental repetition
rate to recover a faithful intensity.
This minimum repetition time depends on the T1 value
and also on the excitation flip angle.90 For instance, with a π2
flip angle, it is well known that a recovery time of at least 5
times the T1 value is required to achieve an accuracy of 99%, to
the price of a lower signal sensitivity, while the same accuracy
is obtained with a recovery time of only 3.5×T1 with a 45°
flip angle (see Supporting Information 10 for this relationship
detailed).
Here, for routine quantitation using OPERA-45, we chose
an accuracy of 97.5% corresponding to 2.5×T1. Therefore, we
set a relaxation delay of 1.5 s combined with an acquisition time
of 0.66 s for a total repetition time of 2.16 s, these parameters
allowing still a good sensitivity and a worst case accuracy of
97.5% for PFOA -CF3 moiety.
3.4

Expressing qNMR results in mass equivalent of
PFOA

The quantitative NMR signal is proportional to the molar
concentration of the detected species in the sample. NMR
reporting is based on molar quantities which are meaningful and
consistent for comparisons of substance amounts, irrespective
of their chemical nature. However, in environmental and
pollution contexts, the mass ratio is the standard approach.
Since NMR is an untargeted method, it enables the universal,

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2025-hdnzl-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-7993-1323 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC 4.0

qNMR fluorine pollution analysis: perspectives on PFAS exposure characterisation using 19 F NMR
non-specific detection of all soluble fluorinated organic
species in a given sample. This includes mono-fluorinated
compounds, polyfluorinated molecules, soluble polymers, and
PFAS—without requiring prior knowledge of the compounds
or their molecular classification. However, without detailed
knowledge of the molecular composition, it is difficult to trace
back to the mass. Although 19 F NMR spectra can provide
insights into the molecular family of fluorinated compounds,
this information alone is insufficient for estimating molecular
mass. Factors such as partial oligomerisation, non-fluorinated
substituents (e.g., ester groups or heteroatoms), or variations
in fatty chain length significantly affect molecular mass without
altering the NMR signal, apart from minor, non-predictable
chemical shift changes.
Given these complexities, we propose in this work three distinct
approaches for reporting qNMR results, depending on the
sample type and research focus:
Known Compounds or Characteristic Signals
When the detected compound is pre-identified or has a unique
signal (e.g., trifluoroacetic acid), its molecular mass is known.
This allows the weight ratio of the species to be directly
calculated.
Class-Specific Analysis
For real-world samples when a specific class of compound
is observed, the detected signal can be attributed to a
representative compound from this class and expressed as an
equivalent of this compound using with its molecular mass,
representative for the entire class. For instance, when analysing
PFAS, the detected signal can be expressed as an equivalent
of a PFOA or PFOS, two well-characterised compounds with
a molecular mass representative of the general PFAS family.
For example, this approach assumes that the overall signal
corresponds entirely to PFOA, thus yielding a content of PFAS
in "PFOA mass equivalents".
Total Fluorine Concentration
Since all molecular fluorine in the sample generates an NMR
signal directly proportional to its atomic molar concentration,
the total amount of fluorine can be expressed as both molar
concentration and fluorine weight ratio. This provides the total
soluble fluorine content in the sample.
By employing these complementary approaches, qNMR results
can be reported effectively across diverse analytical contexts.

4
4.1

Materials and methods
Materials and sample preparation

We have implemented the strategy outlined above on various
scenarios, first with soil and water samples collected nearby
an industrial plant producing PFAS containing materials,
then with everyday life products either containing fluorinated
ingredients or found to be contaminated.
Samples sourcing
Contaminated test samples, 3 soil samples (samples S1
to S3) and 3 water samples from adjacent river (samples
W1 to W5), were provided by the French Agency for
Food, Environmental and Occupational Health & Safety ANSES’s Nancy Laboratory. They were collected by ANSES
from an industrial plant manufacturing products containing

9

PFAS. Location, finished product details, volume productions
and ingredient use rates are unknown. A sample of the
manufactured product (referred to as sample R) was also
provided.
Pharmaceutical ingredients exemplified in this article were
directly extracted from commercial tablets, capsules or spray
medicines. Some daily life products were investigated and
commercially purchased.
2H,3H-perfluoropentane [138495-42-8], also known
as Vertrel™ was purchased from Scientific Alfa Aesar as
technical grade 90%. Perfluorooctanoic acid PFOA 95%
[335-67-1], 1H,1H,2H,2H-Perfluorooctanol FTOH 97%
[647-42-7], Perfluorodecanoic acid PFDA 97% [335-76-2],
Perfluorotetradecanoic acid PFTeDA 96% [376-06-7] were also
sourced from Scientific Alfa Aesar. Perfluorooctanesulfonic
acid potassium salt PFOS 98% [2795-39-3], Perfluoro-3,6dioxadecanoic acid PFO2 DA [137780-69-9], Perfluoro-3,6,9trioxatridecanoic acid PFO3 TDA [330562-41-9], 1H,1H,2H,2HTridecafluorooctane-1-sulphonic acid 6:2 FTSA [27619-97-2]
were obtained from Sigma Aldrich. Perfluoro(2-methyl-3oxahexanoic) acid GenX [13252-13-6] was acquired from
Manchester
Organics,
Perfluoro(2-methylpentan-3-one)
[756-13-8] from Apollo Scientific Ltd and Perfluoro-3methoxypropanoic acid PFMOPrA [377-73-1] from Enamine.
No additional purification and fractionation were performed.
All solutions for NMR measurements were prepared using
a homemade solution of 10% DMSO-d6 in DMSO. Deuterated
solvents (DMSO-d6, D2 O) were acquired from Eurisotop and
DMSO from Sigma Aldrich.
Samples preparation
• Pharmaceutical sample references
To extract some active ingredient from commercial tablets,
capsules, etc. the sample was grinded into a fine powder,
poured into DMSO - DMSO-d6 9:1(v/v), shaken for a few
minutes and allowed to sit. Supernatant was collected and
directly introduced into a 5 mm NMR tube for reference.
• Polluted water samples from industrial plant
The liquid samples are studied directly in 5 mm NMR tubes
with 500 µL of sample and 100 µL of D2 O.
• Polluted soil samples from industrial plant
An exact mass around 50 milligrams of soil (air-dried and
sieved) was macerated for 12 h at room temperature in
a mixture of DMSO - DMSO-d6 9:1(v/v) according to
a weight/volume ratio of 20%. After centrifugation, the
supernatant was collected and directly introduced into a 5 mm
NMR tube.
• Liquid samples
All liquid samples were studied directly in 5 mm NMR tubes
with 540 µL of sample and 60 µL of DMSO-d6.
• Cosmetics or oral hygiene care samples
To extract creamy foundation product, concealer, powder eye
shadow or toothpaste, the material was poured into DMSO DMSO-d6 9:1(v/v), shaken for a few minutes and allowed to
sit. Supernatant was collected and directly introduced into a 5
mm NMR tube.

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2025-hdnzl-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-7993-1323 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC 4.0

10
4.2

Briot-Dietsch et al.
Eyeliner, incl. Polyperfluoromethylisopropyl Ether

NMR analysis

19

F spectra were acquired on a Bruker spectrometer 600 MHz
Avance I (Bruker BioSpin, Rheinstetten, Germany) equipped
with a Quadruple Resonance CryoProbe 5 mm QCI-F
allowing sensitivity increase by a factor of three on 19 F. They
were collected operating at the 19 F resonance frequency of
564.607990 MHz at 298 K under the control of Topspin-2.1
(Bruker BioSpin). 19 F referencing was performed according the
IUPAC convention91 with no need of a fluorinated reference
material. The inversion recovery pulse sequence was used for
longitudinal relaxation time (T1) determination, and a python
program used to extract the values, using a standard leastsquare 3 parameters approach (see Supporting Information 9).
1D experiments
The 1D 19 F qNMR experiments were recorded using OPERA45 shaped pulse.83 They were acquired with a 100 kHz spectral
width (177.11 ppm), with the digital filtering set to smooth,
on 128 k points (0.65 s acquisition time) and a 1.5 s relaxation
delay. Experiments were acquired using block strategy, where
the data were stored independently every 256 scans, and coadded during the Fourier processing. The number of blocks
was adapted for each sample according to the required signalto-noise ratio.
All 1D experiments were processed as follows: the FID
was apodized with a 30 Hz wide Gaussian broadening, zerofilled twice before Fourier transform, and phase corrected.
When needed, to correct for baseline distortion, the spectrum
was reverse Fourier transformed and the 8 first points of the
reconstructed FID corrected by a reverse Linear Prediction
computation using the fast Burg algorithm and Fourier
transformed back. The baseline was further optimized by
applying a spline correction computed from the empty region
of the spectrum.
Quantification was performed by integration of the specific
line in the spectrum. Quantification results are computed
from the area under the curve as molar concentration by
correcting for the effective number of scans (related to the
number of blocks) and expressed in weight ratio with respect
of the original sample. Unknown compounds are expressed as
PFOA equivalent (see 3.4 Expressing qNMR results in mass
equivalent of PFOA).
2D experiments
The HMQC experiment was performed using the SoFastHMQC sequence (presented in the Supporting Information
2). The 2H,3H-decafluoropentane (Vertrel™) sample was at
a concentration of 180 mM in d6-DMSO. Each FID was
acquired with a 100 kHz spectral width (177.11 ppm), with
the Digital filtering set to smooth, on 4 k points and with
a 1.94 s relaxation delay. The 19 F excitation pulse was the
same OPERA-45 pulse as used in other experiments. The 19 F
refocusing pulse as well as the initial inversion SoFast pulse
were performed using a 1.5 ms chirp pulse, covering a 300 kHz
frequency range, with a B1 power at 6.18 kHz. The 13 C π2
pulses were 20 µs. Four scans were acquired per increment and
1024 increments were performed for a total acquisition time of
2 hours 15 min.
The COSY-45 experiment was acquired using a modified
sequence, using 1 H decoupling (see Supporting Information 4).
Both HMQC and COSY experiments were apodized with

Foundation, incl. Fluorphlogopite

-60

-80

-100

-120

-140
ppm

-160

-180

-200

-220

Figure 10. 19 F NMR spectra of two cosmetic products. (1) A
foundation with synthetic fluorphlogopite additive used to add a
glittering effect to products, giving rise to a peak at -119.1 ppm;
(2) An eyeliner with polyperfluoromethylisopropyl ether polymer to
make it longer lasting and water-proof, giving rise to 3 patterns
around -59 ppm, a really weakly distinguishable signal for terminal
-OCF3 , at -80.5 ppm for the -OCF2 - and -CF3 - polymeric moieties
and at -145.1 ppm for -CF- polymeric moieties.

shifted sine-bell along both dimensions, zero-filled once on each
axis, and computed in magnitude after FT. All the DOSY
experiments were computed using the PALMA algorithm 92 .
All NMR spectra were processed using an open-source
Python package dedicated to Fourier spectroscopies called
“Spectrometry Processing Innovative KErnel” (SPIKE).93 All
data series were processed with a automatic pipeline program
derived from Plasmodesma, an autonomous unsupervised
processing of set of 1D and 2D NMR experiments which
guarantees homogeneous data processing within the set.94; 95

5
5.1

Results Case studies
Detection with daily life products

We have tested the procedure presented above on some
everyday products including food, cosmetics and hygiene
products, pharmaceuticals and agrochemicals. The products
included various common items, representing a range
of chemical compositions from fluorinated compounds,
perfluorinated substances to fluoride species. We exemplified
with some NMR profiles highlighting typical encountered
situations, either products containing fluorinated ingredients
or found to be contaminated. However in this case we are
unable to determine whether contaminants are due to poor
manufacturing practices, packaging pollution or to the use of
polluted raw materials.
Claimed fluorinated ingredients
In Figure 10, we present spectra of cosmetic products
containing fluorinated ingredients, as identified in their
official ingredient lists: synthetic fluorphlogopite and
polyperfluoromethylisopropyl ether polymer. Until recently,
PFAS were used in cosmetics for their ability to make
products long-lasting, water-resistant, and smudge-proof
as well as for product consistency, texture and longevity
issues. The most common used were polytetrafluoroethylene
(PTFE) and perfluorodecalin, along with perfluorooctyl
triethoxysilane, perfluorononyl dimethicone or perfluorohexane.
The manufacture and use of fluorine-containing cosmetics

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2025-hdnzl-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-7993-1323 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC 4.0

Foundation, incl. Fluorphlogopite

-60

-80

-100

-120

-140

-160

-180

-200

-220

qNMR fluorine pollutionppm
analysis: perspectives on PFAS exposure characterisation using 19 F NMR

11

Toothpaste, incl. 2 fluoride species
Fluvalinate strip

Unknown origin honey

Concealer
Acacia honey

Eyes shadow
Riesling

Mosquito spray

-60

-60

-80

-100

-120

-140
ppm

-160

-180

-200

-80

-100

-120

-140
ppm

-160

-180

-200

-220

-220

Figure 11. 19 F NMR spectra of four PFAS contaminated samples
from commercial daily life products (toothpaste, concealer, eye
shadow and mosquito repellent spray exhibiting the characteristic
PFAS fingerprint grouping three sets of signals around -80, -115 ppm
and a last cluster centred around -123 ppm (highlighted in blue).

Figure 12. 19 F NMR spectra of four consumer market products with
fluorinated contaminants. (1) Riesling sample displaying multiple
peaks: singlet at -77.7, -146.0, -150.2, -158.5 and -159.1 and two
complex patterns around -147.6 and -162.2 ppm. (2-3) Both honey
from different sources exhibiting peak at -73,7 ppm. (4) Hive
treatment product supposed to contain fluvalinate corresponding
to the peak around -59.5 ppm but containing at least another
fluorinated substances with unexpected peaks at -61.3, -128.7 and
-128.9 ppm.

not only pose health risks but contribute to environmental
pollution particularly through washing off and, ultimately,
disposal.
Tested
cosmetics
include
a
foundation
with
fluorphlogopite, a synthetic mica also used in nail polish,
eye shadow or lip gloss; and an eyeliner formulated with
a polyperfluoromethylisopropyl ether additive. This last
compound, introduced as one of the first fluorinated polymers
for cosmetics since the late 1980s, is recognized for enhancing
waterproof performance.
Some toothpaste samples have been explored. It is
one of the most commonly used healthcare products.
Various fluoride additives are incorporated in commercial
toothpaste formulations to prevent tooth decay; among
them sodium fluoride (NaF), sodium monofluorophosphate
(Na2 PO3 F), stannous fluoride (SnF2 ) or Olaflur, an alkylammonium fluoride. Regardless of the fluorine compound
or the toothpaste formulation, claimed fluorine ingredients
can be visualized by 19 F NMR (see Supporting Information 11).

impurities have been observed in a eye shadow powder and a
concealer with their classical 19 F NMR fingerprints, combining
three characteristic patterns two of them around -80, -115
ppm and a last cluster centred around -123 ppm. Likewise
among tested hygienic products, a mosquito repellent in spray
and a toothpaste were found to contain PFAS. Again we are
unable to determine whether contaminants are due to poor
manufacturing practices, packaging pollution or to the use of
polluted raw materials (see Figure 11).

The 19 F NMR technique enables also the precise
observation of the active substance in fluorine-based medicine
while also ensuring the detection or confirmation of the
absence of other potential fluorine-based impurities. This
approach is useful for quality control,69 guaranteeing the purity
and efficacy of pharmaceutical formulations (see Supporting
Information 12).
PFAS contaminations
In parallel, contamination of cosmetics with PFAS is becoming
a growing issue in recent years,96 since cosmetics applied to
the skin, face, and hair can be a potential route of exposure
to harmful chemicals, leading to various health risks over time.
PFAS were initially added to cosmetics to provide smoothness
and shine, while also improving the product’s texture. In some
cases, they can also incidentally appear in cosmetics due to
impurities in raw materials or packaging issues. PFAS-like

Fluorinated contaminations
We also disclose the spectrum of an acaricide strip based on
fluvalinate, marketed for honey bee protection. The spectrum
reveals a characteristic peak around -60 ppm, indicative of
its primary active component isomers, along with additional
unexpected peaks at -61.3, -128.7 and -128.9 ppm, potentially
associated with at least another fluorinated compound not
mentioned in claimed composition. Impurities that may
originate from various sources, such as synthesis residues,
formulation, or packaging, like active substances, will end up
in the environment.
While the likelihood of fluorinated compounds being
present in wine should be generally low due to controlled
agricultural practices, concerns might even arise from vineyard
contamination, packaging materials leaks or an industrial
proximity. Traces of fluorinated compounds in a French Alsatian
white wine, from Riesling grape were found.
Similarly, two of six honey samples (first-price honey
without specified provenance, and an acacia honey) also
showed traces with a single peak at -73.8 ppm as shown in
Figure 12

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2025-hdnzl-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-7993-1323 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC 4.0

12

Briot-Dietsch et al.

Manufacture of PFAS containing material

Environmental diagnostic

S1

W1

S2

W2

S3

W3

Figure 13. Diagnosis of PFAS pollution nearby an industrial plant manufacturing PFAS containing material. Three water samples (blue spectra)
were collected from a nearby river, and three soil samples (green spectra) were taken from an adjoining plot. They were analysed by 19 F NMR
and compared against the reference product (at least two species, one of which is very marginal according the right shoulder of the peak
at -80.16 ppm). The manufactured product (black spectrum) exhibits the characteristic three-part PFAS fingerprint with signals at -80.16,
-112.60 ppm and a last cluster centred around -123 ppm. This similar pattern was found in soil sample S1 and water samples W1 and W2.
Soil sample S1 exhibits others peaks at -112.40, -112,75, -113,42 and -114,58 ppm revealing at least 4 others PFAS species. Minor peaks,
observed nearby -71.0 -73.5 and -103.1 ppm, were neither identified nor correlated with each other. S2 and S3 show very similar NMR profiles
without the classical three-part PFAS fingerprint. Both peaks at -73.5 and -103.1 ppm are also found in S2 and S3 soils. Water samples W1
and W2 contain at least two PFAS species with two peaks at -115.4 and -115.7 ppm, along with singlet at -82.9 ppm and cluster at -126.0
ppm, the characteristic pattern of PFAS. Additional peaks at -80.9, -121.5, -158.3 and -158.7 ppm were found in W2 revealing presence of
more fluorinated compounds. The peak at -121.5 ppm appears also in W1 and W3 along with a singlet at -112.3 ppm.

5.2

Industrial plant pollution diagnosis

In case of suspected pollution, a comprehensive environmental
monitoring of pollutants is necessary in order to track pollution
source and levels as well as to carry out efficient remedial
measures. We present here an investigation by 19 F NMR of
the occurrence of fluorinated contaminants in soil and water
samples gathered during an ANSES sampling campaign at an
industrial contaminated site (Figure 13). To assess potential
PFAS pollution in the vicinity of this industrial facility,
environmental samples were compared against the reference
PFAS-containing product known to be used or produced at
the industrial plant. The analyses have been performed using
the protocols described here and summarized in Table 1.
Reference PFAS-containing material sourced from the
plant
Interestingly, we also obtained a reference product, either the
intended manufactured product or ingredients used during the
process, however the structure of which was not disclosed to
us. Its 19 F NMR fingerprints, with a characteristic pattern

consisting in two signals around −80 and −112 ppm and
last cluster centred around −123 ppm, is consistent with
known PFAS structural motifs, and in particular fluorotelomer
species. Indeed the chemical shift of –CF2 group closest to
the functional group can serves as a distinctive marker, at
least enabling rapid spectral distinction between perfluorinated
(PFCA, PFSA, PFPA, FASA) typically around -115 ppm in
DMSO-d6 or polyfluorinated (FTOH, FTSA, FTCA, N-alkyl
FASA) which tend to appear closer to –112 ppm.
Qualitative analysis of environmental samples
The pattern of the reference PFAS-containing product was
found in one soil sample S1 and two of the water samples W1
and W2, whereas S2, S3 and W3 didn’t show this characteristic
three-part PFAS fingerprint. Sample S1 exhibits several PFAS
species (at least five), including two major ones, one that could
be identified as a fluorotelomer and an other as a perfluorinated
compound according to their chemical shifts. Additional peaks
reveal the presence of more fluorinated compounds in these
samples. Nevertheless, whereas S2 and S3 exhibit highly

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2025-hdnzl-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-7993-1323 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC 4.0

F1 [log(m2/s)]

qNMR fluorine pollution analysis: perspectives on PFAS exposure characterisation using 19 F NMR

- 8.5

- 9.0

- 9.5

DOSY - Processed with PALMA Version 1.0

- 105

- 110

- 115

- 120

- 125

- 130

F2 [ppm]

Figure 14. DOSY experiment on W1 sample. Two molecular
populations with clearly differentiated coefficients of diffusion are
highlighted.

similar NMR profiles with two well-separated peaks in the
spectrum, they are only detectable with extended experiment
durations indicating a minimal pollution. Two of the water
samples (W1, W2) present the fingerprint of the manufactured
material but show profiles slightly different from the S1 soil
sample. They display different additional species. Sample W2
exhibits an unusual peak nearby -158 ppm, suggesting the
presence of a compound with tertiary carbon–fluorine centre.
DOSY experiments were performed on the W1 and the S1
samples in order to obtain additional information. It clearly
reveals two distinct populations in W1 sample, one of which
is PFAS-related and the other of a lighter species with a
higher diffusion coefficient (Figure 14). S1 shows a greater
complexity in the PFAS components, which suggest at least
two different diffusion coefficients and thus two species, as
previously suspected based on the –CF2 group alpha to the
functional groups.
The PFAS contamination is most likely originated
from production, as characteristic NMR fingerprints of the
manufactured material were directly found in one soil sample
and 2 water samples.
Quantitative analysis of environmental samples
While individual substances cannot be fully identified from this
single experiment —nor was that the objective— it remains
possible to quantify the total PFAS content using an external
PFOA reference calibration.
Regarding the signal of interest, we found that in case of
complex polluted mixture or samples integrating PFECA type
molecules, the -CF2 - moiety located alpha to the functional
group is most significant because of reduced overlap with
other spectral features. The -CF3 region may include additional
contributions from overlapping -CF2 O- moieties.
The intensity of the NMR signal is characteristic to the
number of molecules rather than to their mass, for this reason
the results are naturally presented here in molar concentration
of the analyte in the analysed matrices. The T1 table presents
the quantification results.
The most loaded sample, S1, was found to contain 753

13

Table 1. Quantification results
Sample

[PFAStotal ]

[Ftotal ]

S1
S2
S3

753 nmol/g
<LOD
<LOD

6000 nmol/g
67 nmol/g
57 nmol/g

W1
W2
W3

48 µM
13 µM
<LOD

390 µM
137 µM
22 µM

nmol PFAS per gramme of dry soil after a 12-hours extraction,
as 3 hours was insufficient for a complete extraction.
For comparative purposes to others methods, we also
propose to express this content in terms of mass as PFOA
equivalents (see section 3.4), a way of assuming “artificially”
that all -CF2 - signals adjacent to the terminal functionality are
due to PFOA, an approach which is coherent as all CF2 have
the same molar mass. Thus using the molar mass of PFOA
(MW=414.07 g/mol) as the average molar mass of the present
chemical species, this soil is found highly contaminated at 312
µg PFOAequiv /g dry soil.
The pollutants in soil samples S2 and S3 were only
detectable after an extended experiment duration, indicating
they are much less polluted, with concentrations below the
limit of detection (LOD) for PFAS within a reasonable time
frame (4096 scans), even if around 60 nmol/g of fluorine were
detected.
Occurrence of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS)
in soil and water sample indicate an environmental pollution
originating from the industrial plant, either impacted by
industrial effluents or receiving run-off or deposition from
the site. While PFAS are claimed to be "forever chemicals",
they may be subject to possible chemical transformations
upon deposition, which might account for the variations in
the content and the concentrations observed in the different
analysed samples.
6

Concluding remarks and outlook

Comprehensive diagnosis tool
The diagnosis workflow summarized in Figure 15 illustrates
the use of 19 F NMR spectroscopy for quantifying soluble
fluorine content in various samples as either total fluorine
content or total PFAS content using their characteristic
NMR fingerprints. The modification of active ingredients with
fluorine or fluorinated motifs, remains an important method
for designing efficient new chemical entities, because the
fluorine atoms modulate the properties of active molecules as
well as improving their sturdiness. Chemists have developed
numerous and immensely diverse fluorinated compounds,
which finally end up in the environment. We believe 19 F NMR
offers a robust strategy to observe the whole scope of these
fluorinated pollutants. Traditional targeted approaches often
fail to capture the broader contamination landscape, leaving
gaps in monitoring and remediation strategies. An untargeted
diagnosis tool like 19 F NMR could act as a “hot-spot”
indicator, identifying areas that warrant further investigation.
It addresses the limitations of conventional techniques, which
largely focus on specific, pre-characterized compounds and are
unable to map the full extent of contamination. Or even more,
a synergistic strategy integrating LC-MS/MS and NMR —an

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2025-hdnzl-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-7993-1323 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC 4.0

14

Briot-Dietsch et al.

19
OPERA 45

F

Figure 15. General workflow of fluorinated content diagnosis based on 19 F NMR acting as an universal detector. Various samples either soluble or
extractable can investigated (cosmetic, food, medicine, environment...). qNMR can offer high-throughput analysis by offering simple minimalist
sample preparation, while providing an unbiased overview of the whole soluble fluorine sample content. Credit NMR instrument: Wikimedia Database Center for Life Science (DBCLS).

approach validated in omics research97; 98 — could provide a
more robust analytical framework. Now more than ever, the
iceberg analogy is crucial: targeted methods reveal only the
tip of the problem, leaving the largest part hidden beneath the
Attribution NMR instrument : Database Center for Life Science (DBCLS)
surface as shown in Figure 16.

Moderate to high level pollution diagnosis tool
As of to day, using acquisition time in the order of hours, we
experienced a Limit of Detection (LOD) around 500 nmol/L or
1.5 nmol/g for typical medium-sized molecules. For a small
molecule as trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), the LOD can be as
low as 150 nmol/L, which corresponds to roughly 20 µg/L
(ng/mL). Limit of Quantification (LOQ), typically defined as
three times the LOD according to the signal-to-noise based
definition, rises to low µM, around 5 nmol/g for solid samples
or typically for TFA about 60 ng/mL.
For PFAS compounds, in terms of mass concentration,
the Limit of Quantification (LOQ) would be in the order
of 500 µg/L in liquid matrices and 2.5 µg/g in soil sample,
eventually reconcentration would improve these figures.
So the focus for NMR analysis is not in detecting trace
amounts but rather in identifying and quantifying pollution
at significant concentrations. This means that instead of
working at trace levels as in mass spectrometry, NMR is better
suited to the analysis of contamination at moderate to high
levels, where larger quantities of pollutants are present in a

PFECA

PFSA

FTAB

FASA

ALTERNATIVE EMERGING PFAS

PFPiA

FTSA

FTMAC

PFPE

FN
M
R

PFPA

19

Easy-to-handle diagnosis tool
Through a simple procedure of straightforward dilution or
extraction followed by a spectrum acquisition, 19 F NMR
provides a direct and thorough assessment of the total
fluorinated content, without prior conversion of samples into
instrument-compatible formats. The spectra directly reflect the
presence of all fluorinated contaminants, PFAS or non-PFAS,
expected or unexpected, native or degradation products,
offering an untargeted approach to pollution analysis. The
procedure developed here, based on the OPERA-45 sequence
appears to be an elegant and efficient way to conduct
fluorine pollution analysis by NMR and was applied to
several analysis scenarios. The OPERA-45 pulse is reliable,
robust and particularly suitable for large spectral widths and
compounds exhibiting strong homonuclear J-coupling like
PFAS. Although pre-concentration efforts may be necessary
to address the sensitivity limitations of 19 F NMR in low
concentration samples, handling procedures remain minimalist,
ensuring an absence of cross pollution and the sample integrity.

HISTORICAL PFAS

PFCA

Figure 16. 19 F NMR as a complete tool for untargeted and impartial
analysis, as targeted analysis only allows you to see the tip of the
iceberg.

sample. Moreover, it can be expected that under continuous
development of the NMR technologies in specific cryo-probes
and higher fields, the sensitivity and resolution of the technique
can still be extended.
As illustrated throughout this study, 19 F NMR offers
a comprehensive strategy for observing the full range of
fluorinated pollutants. From its ability to detect all soluble
fluorine species this untargeted, unbiased approach method
stands out as a promising solution for tackling the complexity
of fluorine pollution. However, to realize its full potential,
continuous innovation and optimization will be required
to address practical challenges it faces, including sample
preparation, sensitivity enhancement, and data interpretation
to identify individual substances. We are confident that with
further advancements, 19 F NMR will become an invaluable
tool for monitoring fluorinated contaminants, contributing to
environmental protection and public health efforts on a global
scale.

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2025-hdnzl-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-7993-1323 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC 4.0

qNMR fluorine pollution analysis: perspectives on PFAS exposure characterisation using 19 F NMR
Author contributions
M.A.D. conceived of the foundational idea. J.A.H. made
the proof of concept. A.B.D. investigated, developed, and
implemented the study, leading to the fully refined and
completed concept. M.A.D implemented the presented NMR
sequence and developed the original processing tool. A.B.D.
performed almost all the acquisitions and carried out the
experiments and the sample preparations. L.D. supported
processing tools development to analyse data and helped
some sample preparations and acquisition. A.B.D. wrote the
manuscript with input of M.A.D and L.D. M.A.D. wrote the
supporting information with input of A.B.D. and L.D.

Acknowledgments
We thank ANSES for providing test samples and the French
National Agency for Research ANR for financial supporting
under the grant number ANR-18-CE44-009.

Financial disclosure
None reported.

Conflict of interest
The authors declare no potential conflict of interests.
REFERENCES

1. Dehnen S, Schafer LL, Lectka T, Togni A. , Fluorine: A Very
Special Element and Its Very Special Impacts on Chemistry. Org.
Lett. 2021, 23, 9013–9019. doi: 10.1021/acs.orglett.1c03799
2. Smart BE. , Fluorine substituent effects (on bioactivity).
J. Fluorine Chem. 2001, 109, 3-11. doi: 10.1016/S00221139(01)00375-X
3. Solvay Products & Solutions, Organic Fluorinated CompoundsRaw materials, Intermediates & Active ingredients.
https://www.solvay.com/en/chemical-categories/
fluorine-chemicals/organic-fluorinated-compounds
(accessed 4 April 2025); 2025. Published online.
4. Purser S, Moore PR, Swallow S, Gouverneur V. , Fluorine in
medicinal chemistry. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2008, 37, 320-330. doi:
10.1039/B610213C
5. Inoue M, Sumii Y, Shibata N. , Contribution of Organofluorine
Compounds to Pharmaceuticals. ACS Omega 2020, 5, 1063310640. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.0c00830
6. Shabir G, Saeed A, Zahid W, et al. , Chemistry and
Pharmacology of Fluorinated Drugs Approved by the FDA
(2016–2022). Pharmaceuticals 2023, 16, 1162-1212.
doi:
10.3390/ph16081162
7. Henary E, Casa S, Dost TL, Sloop JC, Henary M. , The Role
of Small Molecules Containing Fluorine Atoms in Medicine and
Imaging Applications. Pharmaceuticals 2024, 17, 281-306. doi:
10.3390/ph17030281
8. Jeschke P. , The Unique Role of Fluorine in the Design of Active
Ingredients for Modern Crop Protection. ChemBioChem 2004,
5, 570-589. doi: 10.1002/cbic.200300833
9. Ogawa Y, Tokunaga E, Kobayashi O, Hirai K, Shibata N.
, Current Contributions of Organofluorine Compounds to the
Agrochemical Industry. iScience 2020, 23, 101467.
doi:
10.1016/j.isci.2020.101467
10. Buck RC, Franklin J, Berger U, et al. , Perfluoroalkyl and
polyfluoroalkyl substances in the environment: Terminology,
classification, and origins. Integrated Environmental Assessment
and Management 2011, 7, 513-541. doi: 10.1002/ieam.258
11. Sauvé S, Desrosiers M. , A review of what is an emerging
contaminant. Chem. Cent. J. 2014, 8, 15. doi: 10.1186/1752153X-8-15
12. Stockholm Convention, What are POPs?. https://chm.pops.

15

int/TheConvention/ThePOPs/tabid/673/Default.aspx
(accessed 4 April 2025); 2025. Published online.
13. Gaines LGT. , Historical and current usage of per- and
polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS): A literature review. Am. J.
Ind. Med. 2022, 66, 353–378. doi: 10.1002/ajim.23362
14. Glüge J, Scheringer M, Cousins IT, et al. , An overview
of the uses of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS).
Environ. Sci.: Process. Impacts 2020, 22, 2345-2373. doi:
10.1039/D0EM00291G
15. Figuière R, Miaz LT, Savvidou E, Cousins IT. , An Overview
of Potential Alternatives for the Multiple Uses of Per- and
Polyfluoroalkyl Substances. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2025, 59,
2031-2042. doi: 10.1021/acs.est.4c09088
16. Plunkett RJ. , Oral History Interview, by Bohning, James
J. on 1986-Apr-14 (First session) and 1986-May-27 (Second
session).
https://digital.sciencehistory.org/works/
0g354g32t#tab=ohDescription (accessed 31 March 2025);
2025. Published online.
17. Ebnesajjad S. , Discovery and History of Fluoropolymers. In:
Introduction to Fluoropolymers, , William Andrew Publishing,
Oxford, 2013, 17-35
18. USEPA deems two GenX PFAS chemicals more toxic than
PFOA. Chem. Eng. News 2021, 99. According to a USEPA
assessment, October 2021. https://www.epa.gov/chemicalresearch/human-health-toxicity-assessments-genx-chemicals
(accessed 4 April 2025).
19. Xin Y, Ren XM, Wan B, Guo LH. , Comparative in Vitro and in
Vivo Evaluation of the Estrogenic Effect of Hexafluoropropylene
Oxide Homologues. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2019, 53, 8371-8380.
doi: 10.1021/acs.est.9b01579
20. Mahoney H, Xie Y, Brinkmann M, Giesy JP. , Next generation
per- and poly-fluoroalkyl substances: Status and trends, aquatic
toxicity, and risk assessment. Eco-Environment & Health 2022,
1, 117-131. doi: 10.1016/j.eehl.2022.05.002
21. Evich MG, Davis MJB, McCord JP, et al. , Per- and
polyfluoroalkyl substances in the environment. Science 2022,
375. doi: 10.1126/science.abg9065
22. European
Chemicals
Agency
publishes
PFAS
restriction
proposal.
https://echa.europa.eu/fr/-/
echa-publishes-pfas-restriction-proposal
(accessed
4 April 2025); 2025. Published online.
23. United States Environmental Protection Agency, CompTox
Chemicals Dashboard v2.4.1, Contaminant Candidate List CCL
5 PFAS subset: 10.246 chemicals. https://comptox.epa.
gov/dashboard/chemical-lists/CCL5PFAS (accessed 4 April
2025); 2025. Published online.
24. Leung SCE, Wanninayake D, Chen D, Nguyen NT, Li Q. ,
Physicochemical properties and interactions of perfluoroalkyl
substances (PFAS) - Challenges and opportunities in sensing
and remediation. Sci. Total Environ. 2023, 905, 166764. doi:
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2023.166764
25. Salvatore D, Mok K, Garrett KK, et al. , Presumptive
Contamination: A New Approach to PFAS Contamination Based
on Likely Sources. Environ. Sci. Technol. Lett. 2022, 9, 983–990.
doi: 10.1021/acs.estlett.2c00502
26. Mikkonen AT, Martin J, Upton RN, et al. , Spatio-temporal
trends in livestock exposure to per- and polyfluoroalkyl
substances (PFAS) inform risk assessment and management
measures. Environ. Res. 2023, 225, 115518.
doi:
10.1016/j.envres.2023.115518
27. Cordner A, Brown P, Cousins IT, et al. , PFAS Contamination
in Europe: Generating Knowledge and Mapping Known and
Likely Contamination with “Expert-Reviewed” Journalism.
Environ. Sci. Technol. 2024, 58, 6616–6627.
doi:
10.1021/acs.est.3c09746
28. Fenton SE, Ducatman A, Boobis A, et al. , Per- and
Polyfluoroalkyl Substance Toxicity and Human Health Review:
Current State of Knowledge and Strategies for Informing Future

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2025-hdnzl-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-7993-1323 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC 4.0

16

Briot-Dietsch et al.

Research. Environmental toxicology and chemistry 2020, 40,
606–630. doi: 10.1002/etc.4890
29. Panieri E, Baralic K, Dukic-Cosic D, Dordevic A, Saso L. , PFAS
Molecules: A Major Concern for the Human Health and the
Environment. Toxics 2022, 10, 44. doi: 10.3390/toxics10020044
30. Dickman RA, Aga DS. , A review of recent studies on toxicity,
sequestration, and degradation of per- and polyfluoroalkyl
substances (PFAS). J. Hazard. Mater. 2022, 436, 129120. doi:
10.1016/j.jhazmat.2022.129120
31. Meegoda JN, Bezerra De Souza B, Casarini MM, Kewalramani
JA. , A review of PFAS destruction technologies. Int.
J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022, 19, 16397.
doi:
10.3390/ijerph192416397
32. Verma S, Lee T, Sahle-Demessie E, Ateia M, Nadagouda
MN. , Recent advances on PFAS degradation via thermal and
nonthermal methods. Chemical Engineering Journal Advances
2023, 13, 100421. doi: 10.1016/j.ceja.2022.100421
33. Yang L, Chen Z, Goult CA, Schlatzer T, Paton RS,
Gouverneur V. , Phosphate-enabled mechanochemical PFAS
destruction for fluoride reuse. Nature 2025, 640, 100–106. doi:
10.1126/science.adi1557
34. Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants
(POPs). https://www.pops.int/ (accessed 4 April 2025);
2025. Published online.
35. European Commission, Commission Regulation (EU) 2021/1297
of 4 August 2021 amending Annex XVII to Regulation (EC)
No 1907/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council
as regards perfluorocarboxylic acids containing 9 to 14 carbon
atoms in the chain (C9-C14 PFCAs), their salts and C9-C14
PFCA-related substances. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/
reg/2021/1297/oj (accessed 4 April 2025); 2021. Published
online.
36. United
States
Environmental
Protection
Agency,
PFAS
Strategic
Roadmap:
EPA’s
Commitments
to
Action
2021-2024.
https://www.epa.gov/pfas/
pfas-strategic-roadmap-epas-commitments-action-2021-2024
(accessed 4 April 2025); 2025. Published online.
37. Ng C, Cousins IT, DeWitt JC, et al. , Addressing Urgent
Questions for PFAS in the 21st Century. Environ. Sci. Technol.
2021, 12755-12765. doi: 10.1021/acs.est.1c03386
38. Chaudret B, Donard O, Eisenstein O. , The French Academy
of Sciences, La pollution aux PFAS : état des lieux des
connaissances et enjeux de société; Ministry of Ecological
Transition & BRGM. 2025.
39. Cordner A, Goldenman G, Birnbaum LS, et al. , The True Cost
of PFAS and the Benefits of Acting Now. Environ. Sci. Technol.
2021, 55, 9630–9633. doi: 10.1021/acs.est.1c03565
40. OECD Series on Risk Managementch. Reconciling Terminology
of the Universe of Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances:
Recommendations and Practical Guidance No. 61; OECD
Publishing, Paris. 2021. doi: 10.1787/e458e796-en
41. Miège C, Peretti A, Labadie P, et al. , Occurrence of priority and
emerging organic compounds in fishes from the Rhone River
(France). Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 2012, 404, 2721–2735. doi:
10.1007/s00216-012-6187-0
42. Han J, Kiss L, Mei H, et al. , Chemical Aspects of Human and
Environmental Overload with Fluorine. Chemical reviews 2021,
121, 4678–4742. doi: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.0c01263
43. Kristiansson E, Coria J, Gunnarsson L, Gustavsson M. ,
Does the scientific knowledge reflect the chemical diversity of
environmental pollution? – A twenty-year perspective. Environ.
Sci. Policy 2021, 126, 90-98. doi: 10.1016/j.envsci.2021.09.007
44. Trufelli H, Palma P, Famiglini G, Cappiello A. , An
overview of matrix effects in liquid chromatography–mass
spectrometry. Mass Spectrom. Rev. 2011, 30, 491-509. doi:
10.1002/mas.20298
45. Jia S, Marques Dos Santos M, Li C, Snyder SA. , Recent
advances in mass spectrometry analytical techniques for per-

and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS). Anal. Bioanal. Chem.
2022, 414, 2795–2807. doi: 10.1007/s00216-022-03905-y
46. Munoz G, Giraudel JL, Botta F, et al. , Spatial distribution
and partitioning behavior of selected poly- and perfluoroalkyl
substances in freshwater ecosystems: A French nationwide
survey. Sci. Total Environ. 2015, 517, 48-56.
doi:
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2015.02.043
47. Munoz G, Vo Duy S, Budzinski H, Labadie P, Liu J, Sauvé S.
, Quantitative analysis of poly- and perfluoroalkyl compounds
in water matrices using high resolution mass spectrometry:
Optimization for a laser diode thermal desorption method. Anal.
Chim. Acta 2015, 881, 98-106. doi: 10.1016/j.aca.2015.04.015
48. Munoz G, Duy SV, Labadie P, et al. , Analysis of
zwitterionic, cationic, and anionic poly- and perfluoroalkyl
surfactants in sediments by liquid chromatography polarityswitching electrospray ionization coupled to high resolution
mass spectrometry. Talanta 2016, 152, 447-456.
doi:
10.1016/j.talanta.2016.02.021
49. Teymoorian T, Munoz G, Vo Duy S, Liu J, Sauvé S. ,
Tracking PFAS in Drinking Water: A Review of Analytical
Methods and Worldwide Occurrence Trends in Tap Water and
Bottled Water. ACS ES&T Water 2023, 3, 246-261. doi:
10.1021/acsestwater.2c00387
50. Teymoorian T, Delon L, Munoz G, Sauvé S. , Target
and Suspect Screening Reveal PFAS Exceeding European
Union Guideline in Various Water Sources South of Lyon,
France. Environ. Sci. Technol. Lett. 2025, 12, 327-333. doi:
10.1021/acs.estlett.4c01126
51. Muhammad N, Hussain I, Fu XA, et al. , A Comprehensive
Review of Instrumentation and Applications in Post-Column and
In-Source Derivatization for LC-MS. Mass Spectrom. Rev., n/a.
doi: 10.1002/mas.21930
52. Teymoorian T, Munoz G, Sauvé S. , PFAS contamination in tap
water: Target and suspect screening of zwitterionic, cationic, and
anionic species across Canada and beyond. Environ. Int. 2025,
195, 109250. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2025.109250
53. Han Y, Pulikkal VF, Sun M. , Comprehensive Validation of
the Adsorbable Organic Fluorine Analysis and Performance
Comparison of Current Methods for Total Per- and
Polyfluoroalkyl Substances in Water Samples. ACS ES&T Water
2021, 1, 1474-1482. doi: 10.1021/acsestwater.1c00047
54. Baqar M, Chen H, Yao Y, Sun H. , Latest trends in the
environmental analysis of PFAS including nontarget analysis
and EOF-, AOF-, and TOP-based methodologies. Anal. Bioanal.
Chem. 2025, 417, 555–571. doi: 10.1007/s00216-024-05643-9
55. McDonough CA, Guelfo JL, Higgins CP. , Measuring total
PFASs in water: The tradeoff between selectivity and inclusivity.
Curr. Opin. Environ. Sci. Health 2019, 7, 13-18.
doi:
10.1016/j.coesh.2018.08.005
56. Togola A. , Note d’information sur les enjeux analytiques
concernant le paramètre « Total PFAS » – Rapport AQUAREF
2023; Ministry of Ecological Transition & BRGM. 2023.
57. Abragam A. , The Principles of Nuclear Magnetism, 0-618;
Oxford Science. 1983.
58. Claridge TD. , High-Resolution NMR Techniques in Organic
Chemistry., , Tetrahedron Organic Chemistry Series. Elsevier,
2009
59. Günther H. , NMR Spectroscopy: Basic Principles, Concepts and
Applications in Chemistry; Wiley-VCH. 3rd ed. 2013.
60. International
Organization
for
Standardization
(ISO)
Quantitative nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy —
Purity determination of organic compounds used for foods and
food products — General requirements for 1H NMR internal
standard method. ISO 24583; 2021.
61. Dolbier WR. , Guide to Fluorine NMR for Organic
Chemists, i-348; John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
2016.
doi:
10.1002/9781118831106
62. Smeltz MG, Clifton MS, Henderson WM, McMillan L, Wetmore

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2025-hdnzl-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-7993-1323 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC 4.0

qNMR fluorine pollution analysis: perspectives on PFAS exposure characterisation using 19 F NMR
BA. , Targeted Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS)
assessments for high throughput screening: Analytical and
testing considerations to inform a PFAS stock quality evaluation
framework. Toxicol. Appl. Pharm. 2023, 459, 116355. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2022.116355
63. Howe PW. , Recent developments in the use of fluorine NMR in
synthesis and characterisation. Prog. Nucl. Mag. Res. Sp. 2020,
118-119, 1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.pnmrs.2020.02.002
64. Assemat O, Antoine M, Fourquez JM, et al. , 19F nuclear
magnetic resonance screening of glucokinase activators. Anal.
Biochem. 2015, 477, 62–68. doi: 10.1016/j.ab.2015.02.006
65. Ikeya T, Ban D, Lee D, Ito Y, Kato K, Griesinger C. , Solution
NMR views of dynamical ordering of biomacromolecules.
Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Gen. Subj. 2018, 1862, 287-306. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagen.2017.08.020
66. Gronenborn AM. , Small, but powerful and attractive: 19F
in biomolecular NMR. Structure 2022, 30, 6-14.
doi:
10.1016/j.str.2021.09.009
67. Dalvit C, Ardini E, Flocco M, Fogliatto GP, Mongelli N,
Veronesi M. , A General NMR Method for Rapid, Efficient, and
Reliable Biochemical Screening. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2003, 125,
14620–14625. doi: 10.1021/ja038128e
68. Dalvit C, Vulpetti A. , Ligand-Based Fluorine NMR
Screening: Principles and Applications in Drug Discovery
Projects. J. Med. Chem. 2018, 62, 2218–2244.
doi:
10.1021/acs.jmedchem.8b01210
69. Okaru AO, Brunner TS, Ackermann SM, et al. , Application
of 19F NMR Spectroscopy for Content Determination of
Fluorinated Pharmaceuticals. Journal of Analytical Methods in
Chemistry 2017, 2017, 9206297. doi: 10.1155/2017/9206297
70. Yamazaki T, Saito T, Ihara T. , A new approach for accurate
quantitative determination using fluorine nuclear magnetic
resonance spectroscopy. J. Chem. Metrol. 2017, 11, 16–22. doi:
10.25135/jcm.3.17.03.036
71. Moody CA, Kwan WC, Martin JW, Muir DCG, Mabury SA. ,
Determination of Perfluorinated Surfactants in Surface Water
Samples by Two Independent Analytical Techniques: Liquid
Chromatography/Tandem Mass Spectrometry and 19F NMR.
Anal. Chem. 2001, 73, 2200-2206. doi: 10.1021/ac0100648
72. Camdzic D, Dickman RA, Aga DS. , Total and class-specific
analysis of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances in environmental
samples using nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Journal
of hazardous materials letters 2021, 2, 100023.
doi:
10.1016/j.hazl.2021.100023
73. Camdzic D, Dickman RA, Joyce AS, Wallace JS, Ferguson
PL, Aga DS. , Quantitation of Total PFAS Including
Trifluoroacetic Acid with Fluorine Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
Spectroscopy. Analytical chemistry 2023, 95, 5484–5488. doi:
10.1021/acs.analchem.2c05354
74. Gauthier JR, Mabury SA. , Noise-Reduced Quantitative
Fluorine NMR Spectroscopy Reveals the Presence of Additional
Per- and Polyfluorinated Alkyl Substances in Environmental
and Biological Samples When Compared with Routine Mass
Spectrometry Methods. Analytical chemistry 2022, 94, 3278–
3286. doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.1c05107
75. Gauthier JR, Mabury SA. , Identifying Unknown FluorineContaining Compounds in Environmental Samples Using 19F
NMR and Spectral Database Matching. Environ. Sci. Technol.
2023, 57, 8760–8767. doi: 10.1021/acs.est.3c01220
76. Keeler J. , Understanding NMR Spectroscopy; Apollo
- University of Cambridge Repository.
2002.
doi:
10.17863/CAM.968
77. Malliavin TE, Desvaux H, Delsuc MA. , Conditions for
the measurement of quantitative off-resonance ROESY
intensities. Magn. Reson. Chem. 1998, 36, 801-806.
doi:
10.1002/(SICI)1097-458X(1998110)36:11<801::AIDOMR367>3.0.CO;2-J
78. Kunz D. , Use of frequency-modulated radiofrequency pulses

17

in MR imaging experiments. Magnet. Reson. Med. 1986, 3,
377–384. doi: 10.1002/mrm.1910030303
79. Bohlen J, Bodenhausen G. , Experimental Aspects of Chirp NMR
Spectroscopy. Journal of Magnetic Resonance, Series A 1993,
102, 293-301. doi: 10.1006/jmra.1993.1107
80. Cano KE, Smith MA, Shaka A. , Adjustable, Broadband,
Selective Excitation with Uniform Phase. J. Magn. Reson. 2002,
155, 131–139. doi: 10.1006/jmre.2002.2506
81. Power JE, Foroozandeh M, Adams RW, et al. , Increasing
the quantitative bandwidth of NMR measurements. Chem.
Commun. 2016, 52, 2916–2919. doi: 10.1039/c5cc10206e
82. Khaneja N. , Chirp excitation. J. Magn. Reson. 2017, 282,
32–36. doi: 10.1016/j.jmr.2017.07.003
83. Coote P, Bermel W, Arthanari H. , Optimization of phase
dispersion enables broadband excitation without homonuclear
coupling artifacts. Journal of magnetic resonance 2021, 325,
106928. doi: 10.1016/j.jmr.2021.106928
84. Battiste J, Newmark RA. , Applications of 19F multidimensional
NMR. Prog. Nucl. Mag. Res. Sp. 2006, 48, 1-23.
doi:
10.1016/j.pnmrs.2005.10.002
85. Aspers RL, Ampt KA, Dvortsak P, Jaeger M, Wijmenga SS.
, Fluorine detected 2D NMR experiments for the practical
determination of size and sign of homonuclear F–F and
heteronuclear C–F multiple bond J-coupling constants in
multiple fluorinated compounds. J. Magn. Reson. 2013, 231,
79-89. doi: 10.1016/j.jmr.2013.03.008
86. Luy B. , Fast Pulsing 2D NMR Methods. In: Fast 2D Solutionstate NMR: Concepts and Applications, , The Royal Society of
Chemistry, 2023
87. Claridge TD. , Chapter 5 - Correlations through the chemical
bond I: Homonuclear shift correlation. In: High-Resolution
NMR Techniques in Organic Chemistry, , Tetrahedron Organic
Chemistry Series. Elsevier, 2009, 129-188
88. Gibbs SJ, Johnson CS. , A PFG NMR experiment for accurate
diffusion and flow studies in the presence of eddy currents.
Journal of Magnetic Resonance (1969) 1991, 93, 395–402. doi:
10.1016/0022-2364(91)90014-k
89. Johnson C. , Diffusion ordered nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy: principles and applications. Prog. Nucl. Mag. Res.
Sp. 1999, 34, 203-256. doi: 10.1016/S0079-6565(99)00003-5
90. Ernst RR, Anderson WA. , Application of Fourier Transform
Spectroscopy to Magnetic Resonance. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 1966,
37, 93-102. doi: 10.1063/1.1719961
91. Harris RK, Becker ED, Menezes dSMC, Goodfellow R, Granger
P. , NMR nomenclature. Nuclear spin properties and conventions
for chemical shifts(IUPAC Recommendations 2001). Pure Appl.
Chem. 2001, 73, 1795–1818. doi: 10.1351/pac200173111795
92. Cherni A, Chouzenoux E, Delsuc MA. , PALMA, an improved
algorithm for DOSY signal processing. The Analyst 2017, 142,
772–779. doi: 10.1039/c6an01902a
93. Chiron L, Coutouly MA, Starck JP, Rolando C, Delsuc
MA. , SPIKE a Processing Software dedicated to Fourier
Spectroscopies. arXiv (Cornell University) 2016.
doi:
10.48550/arxiv.1608.06777
94. Margueritte L, Markov P, Chiron L, et al. , Automatic differential
analysis of NMR experiments in complex samples. Magn. Reson.
Chem. 2018, 56, 469–479. doi: 10.1002/mrc.4683
95. Margueritte L, Duciel L, Bourjot M, Vonthron-Sénécheau C,
Delsuc MA. , Automatised pharmacophoric deconvolution
of plant extracts – application toCinchonabark crude
extract. Faraday discussions 2019, 218, 441–458.
doi:
10.1039/c8fd00242h
96. U.S.
Food
and
Drug
Administration,
Per
and
Polyfluoroalkyl
Substances
(PFAS)
in
Cosmetics.
https://www.fda.gov/cosmetics/cosmetic-ingredients/
and-polyfluoroalkyl-substances-pfas-cosmetics
(accessed 17 June 2024); 2024. Published online.
97. Bingol K. , Recent advances in targeted and untargeted

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2025-hdnzl-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-7993-1323 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC 4.0

18

Briot-Dietsch et al.

metabolomics by NMR and MS/NMR methods. High
Throughput 2018, 7, 9. doi: 10.3390/ht7020009
98. Cajka T, Fiehn O. , Toward Merging Untargeted and
Targeted Methods in Mass Spectrometry-Based Metabolomics
and Lipidomics. Anal. Chem. 2016, 88, 524-545. PMID:
26637011doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.5b04491

Supporting information
Additional supporting information may be found in the online
version of the article at the publisher’s website.

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2025-hdnzl-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-7993-1323 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC 4.0

