Using Prototypical Oil and Gas Sites to Model
Methane Emissions in Colorado’s
Denver-Julesburg Basin Using Mechanistic
Emission Estimation Tool
Winrose Mollel,∗ Daniel Zimmerle, Arthur Santos, and Anna Hodshire
Energy Institute, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, USA, 80524
E-mail: winrose.mollel@colostate.edu
Phone: 929-247-5878
Abstract
Traditional bottom-up (BU) methods estimate methane emissions from oil and gas
facilities by multiplying activity data with emission factors. Top-down (TD) methods
measure methane emissions from all sources across an entire site and often use BU
estimates to attribute emissions specifically to natural gas, often through ethane-to-methane
ratio analysis. However, traditional BU methods do not adequately account for variations
in throughput and failure conditions, which can significantly impact gas composition
and emission rates.
The Mechanistic Air Emissions Simulator (MAES) is a computer model developed
to estimate methane and other hydrocarbon emissions from oil and gas facilities. MAES
employs two distinct modeling approaches: mechanistic models and traditional methods.
MAES uses mechanistic models to estimate emissions based on fluid flow through
equipment and equipment states, offering a detailed, process-oriented emissions representation.

1
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-119c9 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-2415-7123 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

In contrast, the traditional methods utilized by MAES estimate emissions by applying
activity data multiplied by emission factor distributions, offering a statistical approach
grounded in empirical data.
This study applies MAES to assess emission impacts on three vintages of production
wellpads in the Denver-Julesburg (DJ) basin: a wellpad with two stages of separation
("old" facility), one with three stages of separation ("current" facility), and a tankless
wellpad ("future" facility). The study found that increased throughput led to higher
methane emissions in older wellpads but not in tankless future facilities. Additionally,
MAES also showed that failure conditions, like stuck dump valves, increased emission
rates and affected the ethane-to-methane ratio, which could vary by 2.15 times depending
on facility configuration. These findings underscore the importance of incorporating
variability in facility operations into emissions estimates to improve accuracy and guide
effective mitigation strategies.

Synopsis
Traditional inventory methods do not capture how variations in throughput and failure
conditions impact gas composition and emission rates.

Keywords
Bottom-up inventory, Top-down inventory, Mechanistic Air Emission Simulator (MAES),
Methane emissions, Natural gas

Introduction
Methane is the second most potent greenhouse gas (GHG), with a Global Warming Potential
(GWP) of 25-28 CO2 e for a 100-year period. 1 As a short-lived GHG, there is increasing
interest in controlling anthropogenic sources of methane, as a reduction in these emissions
2
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-119c9 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-2415-7123 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

could have a substantial climate impact over decadal time scales. 2 Anthropogenic methane is
emitted while producing and transporting coal, natural gas, and oil. Methane is also emitted
from agricultural operations, principally enteric fermentation and manure management,
and from the decay of organic waste in municipal solid waste landfills and wastewater
treatment. 3–5 This study focuses on natural gas, as methane is its primary component.
The natural gas supply chain is often divided into three sectors: upstream, midstream,
and downstream. 6–8 Upstream operations deal with oil and gas exploration, production, and
initial separation of production into gas and oil components and wastewater. Midstream
operations then transport gas to gas processing plants, where the gas is upgraded to market
standards. Additional midstream transmission and storage infrastructure transports the
upgraded gas to consumers and provides short-term storage. Downstream operations distribute
gas to consumers.
Methane is typically co-emitted with heavier hydrocarbons and volatile organic compounds
(VOCs), and often the ethane-methane (C2/C1) ratio is used to attribute methane emissions
between oil and gas (O&G) and other sources when performing regional estimates where
emissions from multiple sources are mixed. 9,10 Peischl et al. 9,11 conducted comprehensive
studies to quantify atmospheric methane and ethane emissions, specifically focusing on
various natural gas-producing basins in the United States. Their research found differences
in C2/C1 ratios across various basins. Notably, the Fayetteville basin had the lowest C2/C1
ratio of 0.007 ± 0.003 due to being a dry gas basin, with less ethane compared to methane. 12
Conversely, the Bakken basin had the highest C2/C1 ratio on the order of 0.4–0.5 as a wet
gas basin, with more ethane relative to methane. A dry gas basin is a geological region where
natural gas mainly consists of methane with minimal liquid hydrocarbons, while a wet gas
basin contains substantial amounts of liquid hydrocarbons like ethane, propane, and butanes
in addition to methane, resulting in a mix of gas and liquid components.
Researchers often use traditional bottom-up (BU) estimates, combined with ethane measurements,
to attribute methane emissions to specific sources such as oil and gas activities, leveraging
3
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-119c9 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-2415-7123 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

the distinct C2/C1 ratios to differentiate natural gas emissions from other anthropogenic or
biogenic sources. 9,11–14 Traditional BU inventory methods calculate emissions by multiplying
an emission factor and activity data for each known source. 15,16 Different levels of government
and international bodies require GHG inventories for regulatory and reporting purposes. For
example, in the U.S., BU inventories are commonly used for GHG reporting to programs such
as the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)’s Greenhouse Gas Inventory (GHGI) 17
and Greenhouse Gas Reporting Program (GHGRP) 18 and the Colorado Department of
Public Health and Environment (CDPHE)’s Annual Oil and Natural Gas Emissions Inventory
Reports. 19 Internationally, the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC) collects and manages global GHG inventories, which include data from various
countries. In their simplest form, BU methods do not include variability in emission or
activity data. For example, emission inventories submitted to the CDPHE or GHGRP use
basic single-value emissions factors multiplied by counts of components or process activity.
In contrast with regulatory reporting, scientific studies typically use extended BU methods
that include probability distributions to represent the variability in emission ranges for both
emission and activity data. 20,21 Some studies have additionally used statistical methods to
extend or extrapolate available data to fill perceived gaps in available emissions data. 20,21
Traditional BU methods rely on previously collected emission and activity data, typically
derived from published field campaigns. These methods calculate emissions as averages for
a large population of facilities over an extended period. This approach helps in generalizing
emission estimates but may not capture facility-specific variations. The Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) provides Tier 1 and Tier 2 activity data, which are often
used as default options in many countries. Tier 1 factors are broad, global estimates based on
limited data, while Tier 2 factors offer more detailed estimates based on national or regional
data. 8,22 This produces several problems associated with traditional BU inventories: a poor
representation of site-to-site variability in emissions; minimal scaling of emissions with the
size, complexity, or throughput of facilities; and poor representation of temporal and spatial
4
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-119c9 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-2415-7123 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

variability that has been observed in real-world operations. 6,23–28
Methane emissions have also been estimated using top-down (TD) methods. 4,29,30 TD
methods estimate emissions by measuring atmospheric concentrations of pollutants and using
inverse modeling techniques to attribute those emissions to specific sources or regions. 11,31 In
some TD methods, measurements occur during short periods by observing individual plumes
downwind of facilities, 29 while other techniques perform mass balance at a regional scale using
multi-hour observations. 11,14,32 "Multi-hour" refers to observations conducted over several
hours within a single day to capture temporal variability in emissions. "Regional scale"
encompasses a broader area than site-specific measurements, typically including multiple oil
and gas facilities within a defined region, but it is smaller than national or global scales.
Past studies have identified systematic differences between TD and BU estimates of
basin-scale emissions. 10,27 One frequently-noted reason for the comparatively lower BU estimates
is that BU emissions factors under-represent large emitters, also known as super-emitters.
Since large emitters are infrequent, these events may be underrepresented in emission factor
studies due to small sample sizes and the difficulty of measuring large emitters. 24,33 More
detail in BU modeling, such as including probabilistic simulation of large emitters, could
capture these large emitter behaviors, which are often currently not included in common BU
models.
The Mechanistic Air Emissions Simulator (MAES) model (formerly known as Methane
Emissions Estimation Tool (MEET)) was developed to address the two problems identified
above: (a) poor representation of the frequency and variability of large emitters caused
by process failures and (b) insensitivity of traditional BU methods to variability in facility
throughput. 15,20
This study investigates several aspects of TD/BU emission comparisons, using three
prototypical production facilities derived from functional facilities in the Denver-Julesburg
(DJ) basin. Simulating these facilities with varying throughput and failure conditions informs
gaps in TD/BU estimates and suggests the advantages of more advanced modeling for these
5
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-119c9 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-2415-7123 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

estimates. "Failure conditions" refer to a condition where equipment does not operate as
intended, for example an unlit flare or a stuck dump valve in a separator. This study is
part of a larger research program, the Colorado Coordinated Campaign that carried out an
intensive multi-scale methane emissions observation study in the DJ basin in northeastern
Colorado (Figure S-1). 34,35

Methods
The objectives for the modeling in this study are to address two deficiencies from traditional
inventories: not including failure conditions and variability in facility throughput. Additionally,
we address how to efficiently model production complexity in a basin, i.e., how to map more
than 4000 individual facilities into a set of models that can be simulated within reasonable
computational and labor constraints.
For simplicity, the study focused on production well pads. Similar methods may be
applied to more complex facilities, such as midstream compressor stations, 20 or simpler
facilities, such as valve sets on pipelines or metering and regulation stations in distribution.

MAES
MAES is a computer model that simulates high-resolution spatial and temporal methane,
along with other hydrocarbon emissions from natural gas. MAES uses discrete event simulator
(DES) and Monte Carlo (MC) methods to estimate emissions based on emission factors,
activity data, and equipment behavior.

Inputs to MAES include a data file detailing

equipment behavior and counts, a factors file referencing emission factors distributions, and
a gas compositions file with fluid compositions at different separation stages. Facility data,
such as equipment counts and some operational conditions, were sourced from the 2021
Annual Oil and Natural Gas Emissions Inventory Reports by the CDPHE. The behavior of
the equipment is determined by its states and the variables that influence changes in these
6
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-119c9 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-2415-7123 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

states. States represent the different conditions or modes that an equipment can be in at
any given time; for example, a flare can have three states: operating, malfunctioning, and
unlit. In MAES, all equipment is modeled using a finite state machine, meaning each piece
of equipment can be in only one of several states at a time. Emission factors for compressors
were derived from Zimmerle et al.’s 33 study on gathering and boosting facilities, while data
for pneumatics were obtained from Allen et al.’s 36 research on pneumatics. Flare destruction
efficiency data was sourced from Plant et al.’s 37 study on natural gas flares. See S-4 for a
detailed description on the development of gas compositions used as MAES input.
DES is a modeling technique used to study the behavior of complex systems where
events occur at distinct points in time and have significant impacts on the system state.
In MAES, DES models various behavioral states as a function of time. Each new state is
timestamped upon initiation, and the shift to the subsequent state depends on stochastically
based real life probabilities of equipment operation. DES synchronizes events from multiple
simulated pieces of equipment and records them sequentially, noting the duration of each
event. Synchronization is of particular importance to emission simulation, as peak emission
rates often occur when two events – such as two failure modes – occur simultaneously. Once
DES has recorded the event sequence, it is further processed by a serializer. A serializer is
a python-based code that decodes each event and converts it into a time series of emissions
at the required time resolution. 15
Emissions from natural gas systems and equipment behavior are inherently stochastic,
meaning they exhibit randomness or variability. 38 To address this, MAES employs MC
methods to assess a range of possible emissions over a specified timeframe. Through numerous
MC iterations, the simulation accounts for variability by randomly sampling emission factors,
activity data, and equipment behavior. In this study, we typically ran 100 MC iterations
per simulation. This approach generates a range of emission scenarios rather than a single
average, enhancing the understanding of uncertainty in the estimated emissions and facilitating
the identification of rare events like equipment failures. 15 A detailed description of the MAES
7
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-119c9 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-2415-7123 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

model formerly known as MEET is available in Zimmerle et al. 20
MAES uses two types of models:
• Mechanistic models:
In this study, mechanistic models are used for failure conditions where emissions are
a function of the fluids traveling through the equipment, or when it is necessary to
synchronize the emissions from one source with those from another source. Mechanistic
models estimate emissions by integrating equipment-specific operational states, such
as failure frequency, duration, and throughput. These models are applied to scenarios
like compressor exhaust, flare combustion and slip, open tank vents or hatches, and
overpressure in atmospheric storage tanks. Specific failure modes are detailed in the
following section.
• Traditional methods: This type of BU model uses activity counts multiplied by emissions
factor distributions to estimate methane emissions in a given facility. To model when
and for how long these emitters occur, mean time before failure (MTBF) and mean
time to repair (MTTR) are used for leak probability and duration. 20 For example,
traditional methods are used to estimate emissions from component leaks, pneumatic
controllers, well completions, and compressor seal vents.
MAES addresses the variability in emissions by using time series mechanistic modeling of
major equipment units to tie emissions behavior to the fluids (liquid and gas) flowing through
the equipment and the operational state of the equipment, including key failure modes.
Failure modes, commonly called ‘abnormal process conditions’, are often the largest emission
sources on production facilities. 39 The conditions that result in abnormal process emissions
are typically driven by complex physical processes based upon vessel geometry, fluid flow,
temperature and pressure, gas flashing processes, and other physical and control parameters.
To develop mechanistic models, these behaviors are analyzed, and all independent variables

8
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-119c9 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-2415-7123 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

except fluid flow rates are combined into a single variable—fluid flow—which serves as a
useful driver for conditions affecting emissions.
For example, a failure in upstream equipment may cause large gas flows to be routed to
downstream equipment that is not designed to handle that gas. Arriving gas overloads outlet
flows, increases pressure, and changes flashing conditions in the vessel. If substantial enough,
the excess gas and/or flash will overpressure the vessel, causing protection systems to vent
gas. The goal of MAES’ mechanistic models is to simplify these complex behaviors into a
function of only fluid flow rate, while still capturing the key process conditions which result in
emissions. Continuing the example, an analyst models the physical processes and identifies
the flow rates at which the equipment transitions to a new emitting state – for example,
the flow rate at which the vessel overpressured and started venting. The conversion to
mechanistic models typically reduces non-linear behaviors to ‘breakpoints’ at which behaviors
are likely to change. At each breakpoint, the fraction of gas flow that is emitted to the
atmosphere changes depending on input variables and interaction between models. 40 The
simplification from physical processes to mechanistic modeling accelerates computations,
allowing MAES to simulate long durations - hundreds of years is common - to capture
complex, highly variable emission behaviors.
MAES produces time series outputs at one-second timesteps. For each MC iteration,
all emission events are recorded along with their corresponding duration and emission rate,
creating an emission time series. From the emission time series, emission distributions and
the frequency of each emitter can be extracted. The primary purpose of time-series modeling
is to assure that dependencies between emissions are retained in the modeled emissions. For
example, many unconventional wells are cycled between extended shut-in periods to increase
well pressure, followed by shorter flow periods for production. Cycling of the well stimulates
cycling behavior in all downstream equipment, causing correlated emissions behavior across
many equipment units at the well pad. This type of correlated emissions is not typically
represented in traditional BU modeling, and the associated variability in emissions is lost or
9
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-119c9 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-2415-7123 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

poorly represented.
Simulating a facility in MAES with and without a failure mode, or with varying throughput,
supports sensitivity analysis for emissions driven by the frequency and severity of a failure
condition. The following example illustrates how MAES addresses large emitters caused by
failures of key components on equipment. Referring to Figure S-2, separators - an equipment
used to separate the different components of a well stream, which typically includes oil, gas,
and water - have dump valves. 41 Controllers driving these valves use a float in the tank to
sense fluid level, then open periodically to control the liquid level in the separator. In proper
operation, the controller and dump valve drain the fluid without allowing the gas to escape
through the valve. A typical failure mode in a separator is a ‘stuck dump valve’, where the
valve does not close entirely due to the buildup of deposits, a controller failure, or corrosion.
In this case, all liquid is forced from the tank, and high-pressure gas will escape downstream
from the equipment labeled as C (low-pressure separator) to either D (water storage tank)
or E (oil storage tank). Since atmospheric product storage tanks are rated for low pressures,
the additional gas may overpressure the tank and actuate a pressure relief valve (PRV) on
the tanks to vent gas to atmosphere.
MAES simulates this failure by modeling the frequency (probability) of a stuck dump
valve and the fraction of gas lost through the valves when stuck open. Both of these
parameters can be estimated from field data. Tank overpressure is modeled by setting
limits to the volume of gas that can be vented through the tank battery’s exit vent piping;
if gas exceeds threshold limits, a PRV opens. This mechanistic method effectively replaces
a complex physical process with simpler mechanistic drivers that provide a computationally
efficient, realistic, simulation of complex physical behavior.
To extend the previous example, if separator with the stuck dump valve is fed by cycling
wells, fluid arriving at the separator will vary between ‘on’ production periods and ‘off’
non-production periods. Emissions through the dump valve will respond as the well cycles
on/off. Therefore, an emission source which is large on average, appears as periods with
10
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-119c9 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-2415-7123 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

even larger emission rates (when the well cycles on), interspersed with zero emission periods
(when the well cycles off). While both traditional and mechanistic models could simulate
such a failure and produce the same average emissions, only mechanistic modeling captures
the temporal variability in the emission source, resulting in more representative probability
distributions of emission rates. As a result, the MAES BU model estimates not only the
long-term average emissions but also the variability in emissions. Since MAES simulates
at the same time scale as an aerial survey, MAES results can be directly compared on a
probabilistic basis with estimates collected by aerial methods.

Failure Modes
Since failure conditions may result in large emitters that account for more than half of total
emissions in a basin, mechanistic modeling focuses on simulating failure modes. 29,42 Key
mechanistic failure models implemented in MAES include:
1. Stuck dump valve (SDV): When a dump valve operates normally, all gas passes to
the sales pipeline and all liquid goes to appropriate equipment downstream. When
a dump valve is stuck open, a fraction (x%) of the gas in the vessel is passed to
downstream equipment, (1 − x)% of gas is passed to the sales pipeline, and all liquid
goes downstream. A stuck dump valve does not directly create emissions. However,
since downstream equipment often cannot handle the excess gas, these failures may
overpressure downstream tanks or other equipment, causing gas to be vented through
a PRV.
2. Tank battery PRV actuation: Atmospheric tanks are equipped with one or more PRVs
to prevent tank rupture in an overpressure condition. The mechanistic model used in
this study is driven by the rate of gas entering the tank from upstream and flashed in
the tank. When total gas flow exceeds a threshold level, the PRV opens to vent gas
to atmosphere. The PRV will stay open until incoming gas falls below that threshold.
11
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-119c9 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-2415-7123 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

Since fluid flows may be highly variable, PRV actuation may also be highly variable.
While this study focuses on tank PRVs, these devices are present on all vessels at well
pads, and will actuate in similar conditions on that equipment.
3. Tank battery vent failure: As a mechanical device, a PRV may ‘stick’ open with minimal
stimulus from upstream fluid flows. For example, deposits may accumulate on the
working mechanism or a seal may degrade. When the vent fails, the tank stays open to
atmosphere and any gas in tank will escape to the atmosphere. Typically, the failure
continues until personnel detect and repair it.
4. Tank thief hatch left open: Most atmospheric tanks have an access port used to gauge
liquid levels in the tank, colloquially known as a ‘thief hatch.’ Thief hatches serve two
purposes. First, thief hatches can be manually opened to provide access to the interior
of the tank If an opened hatch is not closed after use (thief hatch left open), the tank
is open to atmosphere, leading to emissions.
5. Thief hatch pressure relief activation: Second, thief hatches contain features to provide
backup pressure relief if the tank’s PRV fails to actuate in an overpressure situation.
Depending upon design of the hatch, if pressure relief features actuate, the hatch closes
automatically when pressure reduces or the hatch remains open until personnel identify
the problem and close the hatch. Emissions due to automatic open/close is captured
in the Tank battery PRV actuation model. Emissions due to automatic open/remain
open, are captured in this model. Automatic closure designs are more common due to
safety concerns. They prevent prolonged venting and minimize emissions.

Sample Facilities
The MAES model can estimate emissions from either a single facility or multiple facilities in
a geographic area. 20 Current data indicate the DJ basin has approximately 20,000 actively
producing wells supported by 4,000-5,000 wellpads. 43 The wells and wellpads in the DJ
12
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-119c9 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-2415-7123 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

basin have common features based upon age, company, regulation requirements. Through
multiple working sessions and data exchanges with Colorado Coordinated Campaign partner
operators, 26 common prototypes representing production facility configurations, called
prototypical sites (PSs), were developed (see S-3 for a detailed description of how the PSs
were developed).
Three sample facilities based on the PSs developed for the DJ basin but explicitly
simplified for this study were selected to demonstrate how MAES addresses the deficiencies
of traditional inventory methods. These facilities represent an ‘older’ facility, a ‘current’
facility, and a state-of-the-art ‘future’ facility model. The models were designed to illustrate
the evolution of production facility design in the DJ basin from 2000-2020; a similar evolution
has occurred, and is ongoing, in other U.S. production basins.
The old facility is a wellpad with two stages of separation and atmospheric storage tanks
for water and oil (Figure 1).

Figure 1: Facility diagram representing an old facility with an example of a stuck dump valve failure
condition.

13
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-119c9 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-2415-7123 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

The current facility is a wellpad with three stages of separation (Figure 2) and storage
tanks.

Figure 2: Diagram representing a current facility with an example of a stuck dump valve failure
condition.

A future facility is a tankless wellpad with three stages of separation (Figure 3) and no
atmospheric storage tanks (i.e. a ‘tankless’ facility); oil and gas are both transported from
the facility using pipelines.

14
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-119c9 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-2415-7123 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

Figure 3: Diagram representing a future facility with an example of a stuck dump valve failure
condition.

For a comprehensive understanding of the old, current, and future facilities, please refer
to S-3.1 for detailed descriptions.
Failure modes rates, and throughput were varied to examine their impact on the facility
emissions.

Flow of fluids due to stuck dump valve failures are shown in Figures 1-3.

Although field facilities would vary in the number of wells, all sample facilities were simulated
with the same number of wells, baseline failure rate, and baseline production to support
inter-comparisons. Therefore, a single ’old’ facility represents the averaged emissions of
multiple older well pads, while a ’future’ facility configuration, based on representative
equipment counts rather than the total equipment present in an actual future facility,
captures only a fraction of the emissions from a complete ’future’ well pad. The simulations
were run for 365 days and 100 MC iterations - representing 100 years in common.

Case Studies
MAES can be used for a plethora of analyses, including simulations of field campaigns,
inventory program evaluation, analyzing changes to improve emissions, or processing overflight
15
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-119c9 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-2415-7123 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

data. MAES can simulate a number of different facility prototypes, allowing for efficient
modeling of large regions, such as basin scales (See S-3 for more details). We use three PSs,
an old, current, and future facility to address two deficiencies from traditional inventories
(a)throughput analysis and (b) failure modes analysis posed earlier. The data for these
facilities was obtained from Colorado Coordinated Campaign partner operators and modified
to demonstrate scaling of throughput and increased frequency of failure. 34 All box plots used
below show the box as the inner two quartiles, the whiskers are lines extending above and
below each box (1.5 times the inter-quartile range) and the outliers are observations beyond
the whisker length. 44

Throughput
MAES was used to show that for the same facility, changing throughput changes emission
profile, a behavior that is not captured in traditional inventory methods. The demonstration
varies facility throughput by simulating the baseline (original facility’s water and oil production
rate) production rate multiplied by 0.5, 1, and 2.
Increasing throughput increases methane emissions for the old and current facility, but
not the future facility (Figure 4). Eliminating atmospheric tanks for oil (and possibly water)
and the associated control flares from the future facility lowers the corresponding risk from
overpressure events and thief hatch failures. Lacking these failure modes, all variation in
emission rates was due to random variations in non-mechanistic emitters (i.e. emission
factor based emitters). Removing tanks reduces the need for flares and onsite compression,
reducing capital costs and air permitting requirements. However, savings in costs are offset
by extending pipelines, equipment to stabilize oil sufficiently for pipeline transport, and
bringing in grid electricity. 45

16
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-119c9 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-2415-7123 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

Figure 4: From left to right, the effect of changing the throughput for old, current, and future
facility, respectively. An increase in throughput corresponds to increase in methane emissions for
the old and current facility but not the future facility. The number on the box plots shows the mean
methane emission.

While the current facility does not eliminate atmospheric tanks, it has vapor recovery
units (VRUs) connected to the second and third stages of separation to compress the gas
and send it to the sales line; only the storage tanks have flares for tank vapors. As a result,
fewer emissions are directed to flares, and there is less risk of atmospheric emissions due to
problems with the flare or equipment upstream of the tank. In contrast, the old facility has
a flare connected to the second stage of separation and storage tanks. Gas composition files
for all three facilities were calculated and used as an input for MAES (see S-4 for a detailed
description on how the table was generated). As seen in Table 1, the total amount of vapor
mass from the final stage of separation before the tank sent to the flare in the old facility is
21.8 times higher than in the current facility.

17
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-119c9 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-2415-7123 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

Table 1: Pressure, amount of gas, and C2/C1 ratio for all stages of separation separators
and tanks across old, current, and future facilities. These parameters represent the gas
compositions used as MAES input to estimate methane and ethane emissions
1st
stage of
separation
Pressure (atm)
Old
Current and Future
Vapor Mass (m3 /m3 )
Old
Current and Future
Ethane-Methane ratio (-)
Old
Current and Future

2nd
3rd
stage of
stage of
separation separation

Tank

17.0
17.0

10.2
10.2

N/A
0.34

0
0

7,500
7,375

7.64
7.51

N/A
29.1

35.1
1.61

0.31
0.31

0.47
0.47

N/A
1.89

1.97
4.23

In Figure 4, outliers, indicated by red crosses represent data points that lie outside
the inter-quartile range times 1.5. Since non-mechanistic emitters estimate emissions using
emission and activity data distributions, variations between MC iterations are due to the
selected emission and activity data from emission factor distributions. For mechanistic
emitters, outliers in a given MC run are primarily attributed to equipment malfunctions
or failures. Taking flare as example, operation of the flare is characterized by ‘destruction
efficiency’, the fraction of gas that is fully oxidized by the flare. During the operating state,
the flare operates normally, and the gas is combusted at the flare’s design efficiency of 98%.
When the flare malfunctions, combustion continues, but destruction efficiency drops; for this
study we assume an efficiency of 90%. For all MC iterations, the same probability of failure
is used, but the timing and duration of failures varies substantially between iterations. As
a result, when malfunctions occur in an MC iteration, methane emissions increase, creating
the outliers in Figure 4. Figure S-7 illustrates a typical flare failure scenario, using one MC
iteration on the current facility.
Figure 5 categorizes methane emissions modeled mechanistically and by using emission
factors. MAES models flares, tanks, and VRUs mechanistically, simulating emissions behavior
that depends upon the gas flowing through these units. Flow, in turn, depends on the
18
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-119c9 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-2415-7123 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

throughput of the facility. While simulated failure rates are the same, the current facility
exhibits lower emission rates than the old facility because less gas is routed to flares and
VRUs. In contrast, the future facility holds all gas in pressurized vessels, and lacks these
failure modes.

Figure 5: Mean emissions by facility type and throughput. Blue bars represent typical emissions
modeled using traditional emission factors. Orange bars represent emissions from failure conditions
modeled as mechanistic emitters from flares, tanks and VRUs. Yellow bars represents emissions
from gas pneumatics. While simulated failure rates are the same, the current facility exhibits lower
emission rates than the old facility because less gas is routed to flares and VRUs. In contrast, the
future facility holds all gas in pressurized vessels, and lacks these failure modes.

Modeling throughput with associated failure modes is of interest to regulators and other
stakeholders, as failures are not usually reported in traditional inventories. We examine
three key examples of interest:
First, the current facility has more components than old facility. Using the traditional BU
approach of activity (component count) multiplied by emission factors, the current facility
designs would be expected to have a higher emission rate than the old facility.
19
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-119c9 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-2415-7123 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

Second, regulatory modeling often assumes historical facility designs – i.e.

the old

facility type – using traditional BU methods that do not include the common failure modes
such as stuck dump valve and flare malfunctions modeled here. 46 As a result, the impact
of throughput-driven emission modes is often not reflected in the analysis, and the true
emissions from older, simpler, designs are underestimated relative to new facility designs.
Finally, while this simulation does not model every possible failure mode, it does reflect
high-impact failure modes and the lower probability of failure for tankless facilities. It is
important to therefore to describe why tankless facilities lack the modeled failure modes and
have a lower probability of other failure modes with similar emission rates. Tankless designs
keep all production in pressurized vessels that are pressure-rated and typically smaller than
atmospheric tanks. Higher pressure provides more static head - the pressure exerted by
a fluid column due to gravity- to move fluids through production processes, eliminating a
variety of failure modes exacerbated by small pressure differentials, such as back-pressure
problems due to the small pressure difference between an atmospheric tank and its control
flare. Additionally, pressure-rated vessels tolerate more pressure variation, allowing time
for controls to react, and these higher pressures are more easily sensed, making controls
easier to implement. As a result, control systems are both required to operate safely and
can be implemented to sense failure conditions (e.g. overpressure at any stage, insufficient
oil stabilization, etc.) and shut in the facility. Therefore, tankless operation by itself does
not represent a breakthrough in emissions. Rather, the operational conditions in tankless
systems are more amenable to process controls and remove some failure modes known to
have high emissions. However, these improvements come at a cost: These facilities require
more sensing, more sophisticated facility operation, full liquid and gas pipeline networks,
and often need grid electricity. These factors may not be accessible to all companies in all
production regions.

20
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-119c9 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-2415-7123 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

Failure Modes
Although in Methods section five failure modes were described, this study chose one failure
mode, SDV, to demonstrate that even a single failure mode can have a significant impact on
emissions observed from a facility. For this analysis, we focus on SDV failure rates for old
and current facilities configuration. The future facility is not included, since the tankless
design responds differently to uncontrolled gas flow from higher to lower pressure vessels
(see end of previous section). In both the old and current facility, this failure condition was
simulated by setting the frequency of the SDV to occur once a year for each separator on
the last stage of separation before the tank. The simulations were run for 365 days with 100
MC iterations. This analysis focused on a single MC run to show in detail the mechanism
and effect of the SDV failure mode.
For the current facility operating normally, any gas flashing in an atmospheric tank is
routed to a flare. The pressure differential from an atmospheric tank to a flare is low,
typically < 1 psi (7 kPa). Since this pressure differential must drive gas flow through all
piping runs, flame arresters, valves, and other restrictions, the amount of gas that can be
sent to the flare without overpressuring the tank is limited. When SDV occurs on the final
separation stage prior to an atmospheric tank, some or all of the gas flashed at that stage is
diverted from the pipeline to the tank. Given the low pressure differential, pressure in the
tank cannot rise far enough to push the incoming gas to the flare, which increases pressure
in the tank and causes the tank’s PRV to open.
MAES translates this complex behavior into mechanistic model driven by fluid flow. For
example, the current facility flare is designed to handle 1000 scfh whole gas (470 slpm).
Referring to Table 1, the total flash per well is 9 scf/bbl × 46.5 bbl/h, or 420 scfh (200
slpm). If 40% of third stage gas escapes a stuck dump valve to the tank, total gas flow
exceeds 3000 scfh (1415 slpm). Since the tank-flare system is capable of handling 1000 scfh,
the excess 2,000 scfh of gas (≈ 3.2 kg hCH4 ) will vent to atmosphere through the tank’s PRV.

21
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-119c9 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-2415-7123 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

(a) Current facility

(b) Old facility

Figure 6: Effect of tank leaks and a SDV on tank and facility emissions for one MC iteration. For
the current facility, panel (a), a leak starts on day 319, on the tank, releasing some of the flash gas
from the tank. The gas has a high VOC content, including ethane, resulting in a high C2/C1 ratio
but a relatively low emission rate. At day 336, the third stage dump valve sticks open, routing a
fraction of the lower C2/C1 ratio third stage flash gas to the tank, causing the tank to overpressure
and vent to the atmosphere. While the leak has minimal impact on the current facility emission rate,
the SDV impacts both emission rates and C2/C1 ratio for the facility. Similarly, for the old facility,
panel (b), at day 351, second stage dump valve sticks open, routing a fraction of lower C2/C1 ratio
second stage flash gas to tank, causing the tank to overpressure and vent to the atmosphere. The
impacts of SDV on emission rate and C2/C1 ratio are more significant on the old facility compared
to the current facility.

22

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-119c9 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-2415-7123 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

As shown in Table 1, the gas from the third stage of separation has more methane relative
to ethane than the gas flashed in the tank. When a dump valve is stuck in the third stage of
separation separator, some fraction of gas from the third stage of separation separator goes
to the tank. For both PSs, the C2/C1 ratio decreases during an overpressure event (third
panel on in Figure 6). However, for the old facility, this facility C2/C1 ratio drops with the
SDV, as a result of a very large emission rate, due the amount of gas flashed in the first
stage of separation. Therefore, old facility emission rate and C2/C1 ratio are significantly
different than the current facility, even though both facilities are driven by the same well
production rates and characteristics.

Implications of C2/C1 ratio on methane source attribution
Methods like aerial or drive-by surveys provide snapshots of emissions data over brief periods,
which can be challenging to incorporate into the broader context of annual reporting. By
using mechanistic models, these short-term measurements can be integrated into a more
comprehensive analysis, ensuring that the variability and transient behaviors observed during
these surveys are accurately reflected in the long-term emission estimates.
For this analysis, we focus on stuck dump valve failure rates for the current facility
configuration, as there is more data available for stuck dump valves on current facilities. 47
The frequency of the stuck dump valve was set to happen once per year for each separator.
We assume a driving and aerial mass balance survey using methane and ethane detecting
equipment.
Driving Survey
Emissions from the current facility were simulated for 365 days with 500 MC iterations where
each MC iteration represents one facility, and we present instantaneous methane emissions
and C2/C1 ratio for 500 current facilities. This simulation demonstrates a problem in the
facility that releases a large amount of gas in the early stages of separation. For this study,
23
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-119c9 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-2415-7123 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

a stuck dump valve failure mode mechanism was used to study the effect of the failure on
emissions and C2/C1 ratio.
Figure 7 shows methane emissions in kg/h as a function of C2/C1 ratio. The curved
shape of the graph is because methane emissions decrease more rapidly through stages of
separation compared to ethane. The routine emissions are characterized by low instantaneous
methane emissions with a wide range of C2/C1 ratios since MAES simulates routine emissions
at each major equipment on each stage of separation. However, some emission factors
distributions are long tailed, such as the VRU component leak emission factor distribution
- obtained from a gathering and boosting study. 33 At some point during the simulation, a
VRU component leak emission factor gets picked from the tail of the distribution resulting
in high instantaneous methane emissions during that MC run; shown by the black box in
Figure 7. During a stuck dump valve failure mode when the tank is in overpressure, high
instantaneous methane emissions corresponding to C2/C1 ratio of between 1.10 and 2.10 are
observed (shown by the red box on the plot) compared to low routine emissions associated
with C2/C1 ratio between 0.31 and 4.23.

24
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-119c9 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-2415-7123 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

Figure 7: Current facility instantaneous methane emissions in kg/h against C2/C1 ratio. The red
box shows methane emissions and the corresponding C2/C1 ratio due to tank overpressure as result
of stuck dump valve. The black box shows VRU component leak emissions.

Figure 7 demonstrates a method that could be used during a driving survey to evaluate
the status of the facility. If the site configuration from a given basin is known reasonably
well, a driving survey with a methane-ethane instrument should be able identify not only
that large emission event is taking place, but also classify likely causes of that large emitter.
For example, during a driving survey in the DJ basin in a facility with the same configuration
as the current facility, if high methane emissions and C2/C1 ratio between 1.10 and 2.10 are
observed, it should indicate that there are early stages of separation failure occurring in the
facility.
Aerial survey
To compare with aerial mass balance flights – a form of TD measurement – simulated
emissions must be made comparable to air mass sampled by the aircraft downwind of the
25
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-119c9 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-2415-7123 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

basin. In the DJ basin, a typical transport time for an emission plume across the basin,
influenced by prevailing winds, is approximately 4 hours. This time frame is based on
average wind speeds and applies to the distance that emissions are likely to travel under
normal atmospheric conditions. Therefore, to simulate the air mass seen by the aircraft,
data are block-averaged to 4 hours. Each MC iteration represents one year for one facility;
these emissions were block averaged to four-hour periods, resulting in 2190 emission estimates
for each facility. Summing each 4-hour period across the 500 MC iterations provides 2190
time-average emissions for 500 similar facilities. While this facility count is smaller than the
DJ basin as a whole, it is sufficiently large to illustrate shifts in C2/C1 ratio.
As seen in Figure 8, the 4-hour average C2/C1 ratio for a case with a stuck dump failure
mode was higher than cases with a stuck dump failure mode. The 4-hour average C2/C1
ratio during normal routine emissions for the current facility is around 0.91 but 1.69 during
a stuck dump valve failure mode.

26
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-119c9 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-2415-7123 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

Figure 8: 4-hour average for C2/C1 ratio for the current facility during normal routine emissions
and an Overpressure event. The average C2/C1 ratio increase during stuck dump valve failure
mode.The number next to the boxes represents the mean.

During aerial measurements, changes in C2/C1 ratio could inform on the failure modes on
the facilities being surveyed. In this case, any failure in the early stages of separation before
the tank would result in a higher C2/C1 ratio than during routine emissions. MAES could
be used as a diagnostic tool on failure models effect on C2/C1 ratios for correct methane
source attribution for TD measurements.

Conclusion
This study demonstrates how mechanistic modeling addresses two key deficiencies in traditional
BU methods: facility throughput variability and failure modes. Mechanistic models enhance
simulation accuracy, supporting design decisions like evaluating emissions trade-offs between
adding separation stages or vapor recovery units versus flaring, or reducing emissions by
27
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-119c9 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-2415-7123 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

excluding atmospheric tanks in new facilities.
By incorporating multi-species modeling, these simulations capture the behavior of equipment
under diverse conditions, providing essential data for downstream analyses, such as C2/C1
ratios for basin-scale attribution or facility-level failure assessments. Mechanistic models
also integrate short-duration, facility-scale surveys into long-duration estimates for annual
reporting, translating survey-detected failures into data on failure frequency, duration, and
emission rates—key for reconciling TD and BU emissions estimates.
To be practical, mechanistic modeling must scale to basin-level complexity. This involves
using automated tools and representative sites to classify facilities accurately by design. For
example, with over 4,000 production sites in the DJ basin, modeling each individually would
be costly and inefficient. Instead, prototypical sites reduce the effort by limiting simulations
to key facility types, each modeled across different well counts and throughput rates.
Mechanistic models face limitations in balancing simulation fidelity with computational
efficiency. Simplifications are often necessary and must be carefully validated. Modeling all
emission sources is also impractical; for example, MAES currently does not model working
flash—the flash and evaporation that occur when hydrocarbon liquids are stored for extended
periods (days). This omission is usually negligible for newer facilities, where liquids do not
remain in atmospheric tanks for long durations, but significant for older facilities where
truck load-outs may occur weeks apart. Ultimately, the inclusion of such models should be
prioritized based on the simulation’s purpose. For an analysis focused on GHG emissions
and targeting methane, excluding these emissions results in minimal error. However, for an
ozone or hazardous pollutant analysis, these emissions would need to be included.
In summary, mechanistic modeling modernizes emissions inventory methods for tracking
and assessing methane emissions from oil and gas industry, aligning them with emerging
measurement techniques, new facility designs, and expanded uses of emissions data.

28
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-119c9 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-2415-7123 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

Acknowledgement
Supporting Information Available
• PS Paper_SI.pdf: Supplementary information for the main paper

References
(1) Intergovernmental
2021

–

Panel

On

Climate

The Physical Science Basis:

Change

(Ipcc)

Climate

Working Group I Contribution

Change
to

the

Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 1st
ed.; Cambridge University Press.
(2) Hanaoka, T.; Masui, T. Exploring Effective Short-Lived Climate Pollutant Mitigation
Scenarios by Considering Synergies and Trade-Offs of Combinations of Air Pollutant
Measures and Low Carbon Measures towards the Level of the 2 °C Target in Asia. 261,
113650.
(3) Jackson, R. B.; Saunois, M.; Bousquet, P.; Canadell, J. G.; Poulter, B.; Stavert, A. R.;
Bergamaschi, P.; Niwa, Y.; Segers, A.; Tsuruta, A. Increasing Anthropogenic Methane
Emissions Arise Equally from Agricultural and Fossil Fuel Sources. 15, 071002.
(4) Saunois, M. et al. The Global Methane Budget 2000–2017. 12, 1561–1623.
(5) Ganesan, A. L.; Schwietzke, S.; Poulter, B.; Arnold, T.; Lan, X.; Rigby, M.; Vogel, F. R.;
Van Der Werf, G. R.; Janssens-Maenhout, G.; Boesch, H.; Pandey, S.; Manning, A. J.;
Jackson, R. B.; Nisbet, E. G.; Manning, M. R. Advancing Scientific Understanding of
the Global Methane Budget in Support of the Paris Agreement. 33, 1475–1512.
(6) Brown, J. A.; Harrison, M. R.; Rufael, T.; Roman-White, S. A.; Ross, G. B.;

29
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-119c9 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-2415-7123 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

George, F. C.; Zimmerle, D. Informing Methane Emissions Inventories Using Facility
Aerial Measurements at Midstream Natural Gas Facilities. 57, 14539–14547.
(7) Saji, V. S., Umoren, S. A., Eds. Corrosion Inhibitors in the Oil and Gas Industry, 1st
ed.; Wiley.
(8) Cooper, J.; Balcombe, P.; Hawkes, A. The Quantification of Methane Emissions and
Assessment of Emissions Data for the Largest Natural Gas Supply Chains. 320, 128856.
(9) Peischl, J.; Ryerson, T. B.; Aikin, K. C.; De Gouw, J. A.; Gilman, J. B.;
Holloway, J. S.; Lerner, B. M.; Nadkarni, R.; Neuman, J. A.; Nowak, J. B.; Trainer, M.;
Warneke, C.; Parrish, D. D. Quantifying Atmospheric Methane Emissions from the
Haynesville, Fayetteville, and Northeastern Marcellus Shale Gas Production Regions.
120, 2119–2139.
(10) Mitchell, A. L.; Tkacik, D. S.; Roscioli, J. R.; Herndon, S. C.; Yacovitch, T. I.;
Martinez, D. M.; Vaughn, T. L.; Williams, L. L.; Sullivan, M. R.; Floerchinger, C.;
Omara, M.; Subramanian, R.; Zimmerle, D.; Marchese, A. J.; Robinson, A. L.
Measurements of Methane Emissions from Natural Gas Gathering Facilities and
Processing Plants: Measurement Results. 49, 3219–3227.
(11) Peischl, J.; Karion, A.; Sweeney, C.; Kort, E. A.; Smith, M. L.; Brandt, A. R.;
Yeskoo, T.; Aikin, K. C.; Conley, S. A.; Gvakharia, A.; Trainer, M.; Wolter, S.;
Ryerson, T. B. Quantifying Atmospheric Methane Emissions from Oil and Natural
Gas Production in the Bakken Shale Region of North Dakota. 121, 6101–6111.
(12) Mielke-Maday, I. et al. Methane Source Attribution in a U.S. Dry Gas Basin Using
Spatial Patterns of Ground and Airborne Ethane and Methane Measurements. 7, 13.
(13) Caulton, D. R.; Shepson, P. B.; Santoro, R. L.; Sparks, J. P.; Howarth, R. W.;
Ingraffea, A. R.; Cambaliza, M. O. L.; Sweeney, C.; Karion, A.; Davis, K. J.;

30
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-119c9 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-2415-7123 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

Stirm, B. H.; Montzka, S. A.; Miller, B. R. Toward a Better Understanding and
Quantification of Methane Emissions from Shale Gas Development. 111, 6237–6242.
(14) Pétron, G. et al. A New Look at Methane and Nonmethane Hydrocarbon Emissions
from Oil and Natural Gas Operations in the Colorado Denver-Julesburg Basin. 119,
6836–6852.
(15) Allen, D. T.; Cardoso-Saldaña, F. J.; Kimura, Y.; Chen, Q.; Xiang, Z.; Zimmerle, D.;
Bell, C.; Lute, C.; Duggan, J.; Harrison, M. A Methane Emission Estimation Tool
(MEET) for Predictions of Emissions from Upstream Oil and Gas Well Sites with Fine
Scale Temporal and Spatial Resolution: Model Structure and Applications. 829, 154277.
(16) Stokes, S.; Tullos, E.; Morris, L.; Cardoso-Saldaña, F. J.; Smith, M.; Conley, S.;
Smith, B.; Allen, D. T. Reconciling Multiple Methane Detection and Quantification
Systems at Oil and Gas Tank Battery Sites. 56, 16055–16061.
(17) family=US
Gas

EPA,

g.-i.,

given=OAR

Emissions

and

Sinks.

Inventory

of

U.S.

Greenhouse

https://www.epa.gov/ghgemissions/

inventory-us-greenhouse-gas-emissions-and-sinks.
(18) family=US EPA, g.-i., given=OAR Greenhouse Gas Reporting Program (GHGRP).
https://www.epa.gov/ghgreporting.
(19) Climate Change | Department of Public Health & Environment. https://cdphe.
colorado.gov/environment/air-pollution/climate-change.
(20) Zimmerle, D.; Duggan, G.; Vaughn, T.; Bell, C.; Lute, C.; Bennett, K.; Kimura, Y.;
Cardoso-Saldaña, F. J.; Allen, D. T. Modeling Air Emissions from Complex Facilities
at Detailed Temporal and Spatial Resolution: The Methane Emission Estimation Tool
(MEET). 824, 153653.

31
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-119c9 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-2415-7123 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

(21) Rutherford, J. S.; Sherwin, E. D.; Ravikumar, A. P.; Heath, G. A.; Englander, J.;
Cooley, D.; Lyon, D.; Omara, M.; Langfitt, Q.; Brandt, A. R. Closing the Methane
Gap in US Oil and Natural Gas Production Emissions Inventories. 12, 4715.
(22) Dawidowski, L. E.; Kolmogortseva, O.; Okazaki, T.; Person Rocha e Pinho, I.;
Smyth, S. C.;

Witi, J. 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines

for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. https://www.ipcc-nggip.iges.or.jp/
public/2019rf/pdf/2_Volume2/19R_V2_4_Ch04_Fugitive_Emissions.pdf.
(23) Brown, J.; Harrison, M.; Rufael, T.; Roman-White, S.; Ross, G.; George, F.;
Zimmerle, D. Evaluating Development of Empirical Estimates Using Two Top-down
Methods at Midstream Natural Gas Facilities. https://chemrxiv.org/engage/
chemrxiv/article-details/652712ca45aaa5fdbbcc6934.
(24) Festa-Bianchet, S. A.; Milani, Z. R.; Johnson, M. R. Methane Venting from
Uncontrolled Production Storage Tanks at Conventional Oil Wells—Temporal
Variability, Root Causes, and Implications for Measurement. 11, 00053.
(25) Allen, D. T.; Cardoso-Saldaña, F. J.; Kimura, Y. Variability in Spatially and
Temporally Resolved Emissions and Hydrocarbon Source Fingerprints for Oil and Gas
Sources in Shale Gas Production Regions. 51, 12016–12026.
(26) Vaughn, T. L.; Bell, C. S.; Pickering, C. K.; Schwietzke, S.; Heath, G. A.; Pétron, G.;
Zimmerle, D. J.; Schnell, R. C.; Nummedal, D. Temporal Variability Largely Explains
Top-down/Bottom-up Difference in Methane Emission Estimates from a Natural Gas
Production Region. 115, 11712–11717.
(27) Johnson, M. R.; Conrad, B. M.; Tyner, D. R. Creating Measurement-Based Oil and
Gas Sector Methane Inventories Using Source-Resolved Aerial Surveys. 4, 139.
(28) MacKay, K.; Lavoie, M.; Bourlon, E.; Atherton, E.; O’Connell, E.; Baillie, J.;

32
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-119c9 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-2415-7123 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

Fougère, C.; Risk, D. Methane Emissions from Upstream Oil and Gas Production in
Canada Are Underestimated. 11, 8041.
(29) Cusworth, D. H.; Duren, R. M.; Thorpe, A. K.; Olson-Duvall, W.; Heckler, J.;
Chapman, J. W.; Eastwood, M. L.; Helmlinger, M. C.; Green, R. O.; Asner, G. P.;
Dennison, P. E.; Miller, C. E. Intermittency of Large Methane Emitters in the Permian
Basin. 8, 567–573.
(30) Zhang, Y. et al. Quantifying Methane Emissions from the Largest Oil-Producing Basin
in the United States from Space. 6, eaaz5120.
(31) Riddick, S. N.; Mbua, M.; Santos, A.; Hartzell, W.; Zimmerle, D. J. Potential
Underestimate in Reported Bottom-up Methane Emissions from Oil and Gas
Operations in the Delaware Basin. 15, 202.
(32) Barkley, Z. R.; Davis, K. J.; Feng, S.; Cui, Y. Y.; Fried, A.; Weibring, P.; Richter, D.;
Walega, J. G.; Miller, S. M.; Eckl, M.; Roiger, A.; Fiehn, A.; Kostinek, J. Analysis of Oil
and Gas Ethane and Methane Emissions in the Southcentral and Eastern United States
Using Four Seasons of Continuous Aircraft Ethane Measurements. 126, e2020JD034194.
(33) Zimmerle, D.; Vaughn, T.; Luck, B.; Lauderdale, T.; Keen, K.; Harrison, M.;
Marchese, A.; Williams, L.; Allen, D. Methane Emissions from Gathering Compressor
Stations in the U.S. 54, 7552–7561.
(34) C3: Colorado Coordinated Campaign | METEC | Colorado State University. https:
//metec.colostate.edu/c3/.
(35) Zimmerle, D.; Dileep, S.; Quinn, C. Unaddressed Uncertainties When Scaling Regional
Aircraft Emission Surveys to Basin Emission Estimates. 58, 6575–6585.
(36) Allen, D. T.; Pacsi, A. P.; Sullivan, D. W.; Zavala-Araiza, D.; Harrison, M.; Keen, K.;
Fraser, M. P.; Daniel Hill, A.; Sawyer, R. F.; Seinfeld, J. H. Methane Emissions from
33
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-119c9 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-2415-7123 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

Process Equipment at Natural Gas Production Sites in the United States: Pneumatic
Controllers. 49, 633–640.
(37) Plant, G.; Kort, E. A.; Brandt, A. R.; Chen, Y.; Fordice, G.; Gorchov Negron, A. M.;
Schwietzke, S.; Smith, M.; Zavala-Araiza, D. Inefficient and Unlit Natural Gas Flares
Both Emit Large Quantities of Methane. 377, 1566–1571.
(38) Liu, Y. et al. Assessment of Current Methane Emission Quantification Techniques for
Natural Gas Midstream Applications. 17, 1633–1649.
(39) Zavala-Araiza, D.; Alvarez, R. A.; Lyon, D. R.; Allen, D. T.; Marchese, A. J.;
Zimmerle, D. J.; Hamburg, S. P. Super-Emitters in Natural Gas Infrastructure Are
Caused by Abnormal Process Conditions. 8, 14012.
(40) Vora, P.; Zimmerle, D. J.; Duggan, J. Use of Mechanistic Modeling to Improve Failure
Mode Representation in Emissions Studies.
(41) Olugbenga, A. G.; Al-Mhanna, N. M.; Yahya, M. D.; Afolabi, E. A.; Ola, M. K.
Validation of the Molar Flow Rates of Oil and Gas in Three-Phase Separators Using
Aspen Hysys. 9, 327.
(42) Frankenberg, C.; Thorpe, A. K.; Thompson, D. R.; Hulley, G.; Kort, E. A.; Vance, N.;
Borchardt, J.; Krings, T.; Gerilowski, K.; Sweeney, C.; Conley, S.; Bue, B. D.;
Aubrey, A. D.; Hook, S.; Green, R. O. Airborne Methane Remote Measurements Reveal
Heavy-Tail Flux Distribution in Four Corners Region. 113, 9734–9739.
(43) COGCC Data. https://cogcc.state.co.us/data.html.
(44) Visualize Summary Statistics with Box Plot - MATLAB Boxplot. https://www.
mathworks.com/help/stats/boxplot.html.
(45) Benefits of The Tankless Production Facility - Halker Consulting. https://www.
halker.com/benefits-of-the-tankless-production-facility/.
34
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-119c9 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-2415-7123 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

(46) Greenhouse
Determinations

Gas
for

Reporting
Petroleum

Rule:
and

Revisions
Natural

Gas

and

Confidentiality

Systems.

https:

//www.federalregister.gov/documents/2023/08/01/2023-14338/

greenhouse-gas-reporting-rule-revisions-and-confidentiality-determinations-for-petr
(47) Lyon, D. R.; Alvarez, R. A.; Zavala-Araiza, D.; Brandt, A. R.; Jackson, R. B.;
Hamburg, S. P. Aerial Surveys of Elevated Hydrocarbon Emissions from Oil and Gas
Production Sites. 50, 4877–4886.

35
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-119c9 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-2415-7123 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

TOC Graphic

36
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-119c9 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-2415-7123 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

