The CO to reduce the CO essential. It is achieved through Multiple catalytic sites. The Multiple catalytic sites are created through a novel intercrossing framework catalyst. The intercrossing framework is created between MgO framework and AlPO catalyst has multiple acidic sites on superoxide ion, oxyanion, octahedral Al intercrossing frameworks is achieved in first time and the material is named as Kankarlite-2. The active sites and intercrossed framework are confirmed in the crystal structure drawn by XRD data. The surface area is 60m analysis are the supportive evidence for the intercrossing of the two frameworks. Though the surface area and pore volume is low, the activity is too high due to the intercrossing framework. The effective catalytic activity at lower temperature may be due to the cooperative effect of such multiple active sites which leads to the multi-molecular assembling of CO temperature (63%). The multi-molecular assembling is calculated by a new formula of Thus we have achieved intercrossing framework catalyst and multi-molecular catalysis for Carbon capturing at lower temperature. KEYWORDS 
 Intercrossed framework, multiple acidic sites, multi-molecular catalysis, CO decomposition 
Department of Chemistry, Manonmaniam Sundaranar University, Abishekapatti 
* E-mail: chellapandiankannan@gmail.com, ORCID: 0000-0002-6244-8367 
 decomposition is needed high temperature in conventional methods. Our aim is 
1. Introduction greenhouse gas contributing to the enhanced greenhouse effect both presently and in the foreseeable future is CO produces CO absorption, membrane separation, adsorption and cryogenic CO method of absorption by liquid amines [4], ionic liquids [5], amino acid-functionalized ionic liquid [6], ionic-mixed solvents [7] and deep eutectic solvents [8] are promising materials. Yet, despite their advantages, they suffer from serious corrosion problems, considerable energy loss, high sorbent cost, lower gas–liquid interfacial surface area and ineffective regeneration [9]. As a result of these limitations, CO porous materials especially aluminophosphate materials offers several advantages, including enhanced uptake efficiency, simple recovery, high adsorption capacity even in humid conditions, ease of handling and material stability [10]. Generally, the AlPO materials are microporous in nature, which restricts the incorporation of large organic molecules into their pores. Their limited pore size hinders their practicality in catalyzing reactions involving large molecules. In order to overcome this limitation and enhance the pore size of AlPO mesoporous molecular sieves [11]. Mesoporous AlPO synthesized using the conventional hydrothermal method [12]. This involves crystallizing an active aqueous aluminophosphate gel that contains templating agents like organic amines or quaternary ammonium ions [13]. But the disadvantage of this method is that the process has taken a long time [14] and also requires high temperature [15]. The reaction had been carried out in an autoclave. So there is some necessity to overcome such issues. In this paper, we have explored the room temperature synthesis of MgO-
Global warming is an international issue [1] and the most important anthropogenic 
AlPO period of time compared to the synthesis process in reported literature [16]. Isomorphously substituted Mg-AlPO di-n-propyleneamine [17] etc without autoclave. But the framework intercrossing in MgO-AlPO frameworks are intercrossed together, creating a single structure with unique properties [18] [19]. There are only a few reports about intercrossing framework in carbon nanotubes [20] and polymers [21]. As of now, there is no report on the intercrossing framework in mesoporous and microporous molecular sieves. Thus the synthesized MgOAlPO templated isomorphous substituted Mg-AlPO decomposition. Though employing the same CO study, the achieved oxygen selectivity was only 50% [22]. So to attain higher oxygen selectivity, a novel intercrossed framework of MgO-AlPO reduce CO lower temperature with high O 2. Experimental 2.1 Materials The following materials are used as a source for the synthesis of MgO-AlPO Aluminium hydroxide (Merck), Orthophosphoric acid (Nice, GR), Magnesium sulphate (Merck,GR) and Tetrapropylammonium hydroxide (99% purity, Lobal Chemie). All these chemicals are used in the synthesis without further treatment. 
 catalyst with intercrossing frameworks using the simple Sol gel method in a short 
 is applied for CO decomposition. In the reported literature, n-butylamine 
 decomposition. The framework creates multiple acidic sites which are useful to 
MgO-AlPO of the gel is Al(OH) aluminium hydroxide is mixed in 100ml of deionized water and 20ml of TPAOH is dissolved in 50ml of water. The two solutions are combined and stirred for one hour at room temperature using a magnetic stirrer. Following that, approximately 5.8ml of orthophosphoric acid and 6g of magnesium sulphate are added to the mixture, which is continuously stirred for 2 hours to obtain a homogeneous mixture. The resulting mixture is kept undisturbed for 16 hours for crystallization. Then the supernatant liquid is decanted and the settled precipitate is washed thoroughly with deionized water until the pH becomes neutral. The precipitate is then dried at 200°C in a hot oven, followed by calcination at 400°C for 5 hours to remove the template molecules from the pores. 
2.3 Catalytic reactor catalyst, both sides of the U-shaped reactor are packed with asbestos wool. It is immersed in engine oil to maintain the temperature. The engine oil beaker is placed on a hot plate. The inlet of the reactor is connected to a cylinder and the outlet is connected to a gas collector. The CO gas collector. 2.4 Gas Chromatography analysis The efficiency of the decomposition process is analyzed by a Shimadzu chromatograph equipped with a thermal conductivity detector and packed column. Chromatographic conditions are maintained at 5 V and a current of 115 mA. The analysis is conducted by collecting the final gas product every hour to optimize the temperature, flow rate, catalyst dosage and time on stream. 
The catalytic reaction is performed through a U-shaped tube filled with calcined 
2.5 Characterization techniques patterns in the 2θ range of 5° - 80° with the use of Bruker, an advanced D8 X-ray diffractometer with Cu-Kα radiation. Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra are recorded by the FT-IR 8400S (Shimadzu) spectrometer. The samples were pressed into a pellet with KBr. It is analyzed in the wavelength domain of 400 – 4000 cm Teller (BET) surface area measurements are carried out by micrometrics ASAP2010 instrument. The samples were previously outgassed for 30 minutes at 150°C and then heated for 120 minutes at 350°C. N chemisorption is carried out with the Quantachrome autosorb iq instrument. About 0.112g sample is packed in the bed and degassed with Helium gas at 150°C for 2 hours. The adsorption of ammonia gas has been carried at 40°C and desorbed at 400°C for 35minutes. High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) images are taken by the JEOL JEM 2100 (200 kV). Dropping a colloidal solution over carbon-coated copper grids yielded the samples. This microscope enables to view lattice resolution of 0.14 nm and point-to-point resolution of 0.19 nm. 
3. Result and Discussion 3.1 XRD Analysis   The XRD analysis of MgO-AlPO shown in Figure 1. The peaks at 8.86°, 16.2° and 21.29° are indexed to (110), (301) and (512) planes are resembled that the crystal system of AlPO and unit cell parameters are a=6.13, b=7.51, c=8.58). The d-spacing and the peaks at 38.2°, 44.5°,66.8° and 78.2° are indexed to (111), (200), (202) and (311) planes which are 
The crystal structure of the materials is characterised by X-ray powder diffraction resembled that the crystal system of Mg-O is cubic phase. These peaks are good in agreement with the match file- 96-901-3253 and the unit cell parameters are a=b=c= 3.97. 
Silverish grey- Aluminium, Green- Phosphorous, Brown- Oxygen, Pink- Magnesium 
 From Figure 2, it is clearly observed that the two frameworks of MgO and AlPO as a single material. The magnesium atoms are linked through tetragonal oxygen, which is formed superoxide ions (O aluminium (AlO form oxyanions (O intercrossed framework of MgO and AlPO pattern. 1. a new peak is emerged at 8.8°, 2. The shifting in the 2θ values of intercrossed framework of MgO and AlPO MgO and AlPO evidences are proved the intercrossing frameworks of MgO and AlPO
Intercrossing of framework due to the H framework. The formed phosphate ion induces the AlPO phosphoric acid induces both the frameworks and so the intercrossing of the two frameworks happens (Figure 2). 
3.2 Proposed mechanism for Superoxide ion and octahedral Mg catalytic site formation 
The multiple acidic sites formation is discussed in the following sections 4.2 and 4.3. The superoxide ion formation is confirmed in the crystal structure which is drawn based on XRD pattern (Figure 2). The superoxide ion formation is may be due to the template effect on MgO framework. The template has OH molecules) as shown in Scheme S1. The sulphate ion has coordinated two template molecules 
Figure 2. Crystal structure – intercrossing of MgO and AlPO framework as an ion pair that is acting as a templating agent. The OH Magnesium hydroxide (Mg produce the MgO framework with the superoxide ion (Scheme S1). In the MgO framework, oxygen has four coordination. The two excess negative charges that appear on oxygen act as superoxide ion, which is balanced by two protons. Similarly, the 4 negative charges on Mg are balanced by four protons. The H there is a possibility for the intercrossing of the AlPO
3.3 Oxyanions and octahedral aluminium catalytic site formation pattern (Figure 2). In AlPO due to the template effect, because of the octahedral coordination of aluminium in AlPO framework, the oxyanion is formed. The aluminium has three negative charges and oxygen has one negative charge which is balanced by protons as shown in Scheme S2. 
3. The broad band at 3500 – 3670 cm OH, Al-OH groups [24]. An absorption band at 1648 cm template molecules [25]. A smaller vibration near 1520 cm water molecules [15]. These three bands are reduced after calcination. The absorption in the region 1100 cm Symmetric stretching vibration of tetrahedral framework or AlO cm [27] and 481 cm vibrations of P-O in AlPO Aluminophosphate (MgO-AlPO
 The Oxyanion formation is confirmed by crystal structure drawn on the basis of XRD 
3.5 Thermogravimetric Analysis analysis (DTG) curves of MgO-AlPO AlPO to the desorption of water [30]. Then 8.46% mass loss between 210 and 325°C assigned to the decomposition of TPAOH [25] and 5.62% mass loss is observed at 450°C, which may be due to the removal of carbon residues. Because the decomposition of TPAOH leaves fewer carbon residues, it may decompose at 450°C [31]. In the reported literature, there is a heavy weight loss of 24% with an endothermic process from 80 to 216°C, which is due to the removal of water along with template molecules. And the second weight loss of 14.06% from 250-310°C is due to the oxidative decomposition of remaining template molecules [32]. 
The thermo–gravimetry analysis (TGA) and differentiation thermo–gravimetric 
 is shown 11.3% weight loss with an exothermic process from 100 to 200°C attributed 
But in the present study, the weight loss at 450°C is may be due to the intercrossing of AlPO and MgO frameworks. The intercrossing may prevent the complete decomposition and desorption of the template from the pore. It results in carbonization. This carbon oxidizes to carbon dioxide at 450°C. The weight loss at 100 to 200°C, 210°C and 325°C are also appeared in the isomorphous substituted Mg same weight loss temperature as in isomorphous substituted MgAlPO loss percentage is reduced in the intercrossing framework of MgO and AlPO an evidence for the intercrossing framework of MgO and AlPO framework accommodating less quantity of template. 
Figure 5 which is indicated that the material has a double pore formation. The corresponding textural properties, such as the BET specific surface area, specific pore volume and average pore diameter are summarized in Table 2. 
The N adsorption–desorption isotherms of the MgO-AlPO material is observed in 
It is clear that the MgO-AlPO clearly confirms the mesoporous nature. But the hysteresis loop represents the existence of non-uniform mesopores [33]. This may be due to the two-pore formation in MgO-AlPO the reported literature, CTAB templated, isomorphous substituted Mg-AlPO diameter of 2 nm [34]. Similarly, TPAOH templated Mg-AlPO [17]. In the present study, MgO-AlPO two pores are 4 nm and 5nm. It may be due to intercrossing of two frameworks (Figure 2). 
 Figure 5.N adsorption isotherm and BJH pore size distribution of MgO-AlPO  Table 2 N adsorption isotherm and BJH pore size distribution of MgO-AlPO 
3.7 Static chemisorption determine the acid sites in the MgO-AlPO that the acid sites are strong. Total ammonia desorption from MgO-AlPO
           Figure 6. Static chemisorption of MgO-AlPO
3.8 HR-TEM Analysis the particles seems to be thicker than the edges. It is indicated the intercrossing of MgO framework and AlPO structure (Figure 2). The presence of bright spots in the SAED pattern is confirmed that the material is polycrystalline in nature [35]. 4. Catalytic application of MgO-AlPO 4.1 Effect of Temperature 
Catalytic applications have been conducted within a temperature range from room temperature to 250°C. The corresponding data are found in Table S1 and Figure 7. 
The static chemisorption is shown in the Figure 6. The analysis is performed to 
The HR-TEM images of MgO-AlPO are shown in Figure S1. The central portion of 
From Figure 7 and Table S1, it is clearly observed that the conversion and oxygen selectivity are independent of temperature up to 150°C. This is attributed to the enhanced affinity between CO oxygen selectivity slightly increases (78%) because very weak active sites are also interacting with the CO decomposition is endothermic reaction [37]. In the conventional method, the catalyst (Zinc exchanged Y zeolite) is required 450°C for CO But in the present investigation, the high conversion and selectivity at 200°C is may be due to the interaction of multiple active sites with CO Oxyanion). The CO conventional catalyst has no multiple active sites, so it needs high temperature (450°C). The multiple active sites interaction with CO cooperative effect is shown in Schemes S3 and S4. Moreover, the multi-molecular pillared mechanism is followed (Scheme S3), in which positive charges are appeared on oxygen atom, the charges are repel to each other through space and two negative charges are 
Figure 7. Effect of temperature on CO decomposition over MgO-AlPO
 and multiple acidic sites of intercrossed framework of MgO-AlPO. At 200°C, 
. In general, the CO formation is highly exothermic up to 800°C [36]. But CO appeared on the carbon are also helpful to relieve oxygen from carbon. These two factors reduced the decomposition temperature. Hence the reaction has been undergone at lower temperature compare to the conventional methods. 
4.2 Innovative Concept of Catalysis catalyst depends upon the surface area of the catalyst. In other words, the rate of the reaction and the conversion are directly proportional to the catalyst surface area [40]. But in our catalyst, the conversion is not depending on surface area because surface area of our catalyst is very low, but conversion is high. This observation is against the well-known heterogeneous catalysis phenomenon. This factor induces us to invent the new concept which is involved in the reaction. In order to determine whether the reaction is surface area dependent or acidic/active sites dependent, we have to correlate the conversion and surface area which is 
        C= K S      (1) 
         K= 
We have applied this equation for CO catalytic process, the value of conversion and surface area are 99% and 59m
       So,   K= 
As heterogeneous catalysis is a surface phenomenon, the activity of heterogeneous 
The CO is depended on the acidic / active sites. In order to find out the number of molecules assembling on an acidic / active site per minute for conversion, we need to correlate the conversion with temperature. So, we need the data for rate constant and total active/ acidic sites (concentration of acidity). These two values can be obtained from the intercept (rate constant) and slope (concentration of acidity) of the plot. By using these data, we have formulated a new formula for calculating the number of molecules assembling over acidic / active site per minute. 
The formula is as follows. where Pn – multimolecular Pillared assembling of CO
 decomposition reaction has the K value is 1.6 over the MgO-AlPO catalyst which 
Multi-molecular pillared assembling of molecule on an active/acidic site per minute, 
If more than two molecules assembling on active/acidic site, it may be consider as a CO pillar. Now, we substitute the values, which are obtained from the Figure 8 in the equation -2, we have a result of 8 molecules assembling on active/acidic site per minute. So, it is a multimolecular pillared assembling of CO verifying its validity (Table S2). All catalysts have ‘K’ value more than 1 which is indicated that the CO have positive value of ‘m’ is denoted that the acidic/active sites are active during the reaction, but the catalysts which have negative value of ‘m’ is denoted that the acidic/active sites are deactivated during the reaction (Table S2). The deactivation means that the conversion decreases with increased of temperature. So the multi-molecular assembling mechanism is not applicable for the catalyst with negative value of P
4.3 Proposed Mechanism for the multi-molecular pillared decomposition of CO one and above and formed a pillar like structure. The length of the pillar is depended on the acidic site affinity towards CO metal ion and its co-ordination in the framework. The multi-molecular pillared assembling mechanism is shown in Scheme S3 and it is proposed based on the formula (2). As per the formula (2) 8 molecules of CO Then the pillar has positive charge on each oxygen atom and the positive charges are repelling themselves to break down the pillar to produce oxygen and olefinic carbon chain. 
 conversion reaction is depended on acidic / active sites. The catalysts which 
At the end of the reaction the olefinic chain is removed from the acidic sites. The olefinic carbon chain is an allene molecule with the ketonic group at both end (Scheme S3). It is a new molecule. Thus the carbon are captured from carbon dioxide and O the important process for global warming reduction. This reaction is otherwise known as carbon capturing. This mechanism is supported by CO% (Table S2). If the catalyst is not followed the multi-molecular assembling mechanism, the CO production is high and also P is negative (Table S2). If the catalyst followed the multi-molecular assembling mechanism, it is produced less CO and high O decomposition of CO
4.4 UV-Visible Spectrum new molecule of Octa-allene diketone. So we have characterized the catalyst after the reaction by UV-Vis spectrum. The UV–Vis spectrum of MgO-AlPO in the Figure 9 in order to confirm the presence of diketone product in the pores of the catalyst. 
The first band at 200-300nm may be due to the presence of diketone product (Scheme S3) [41][42].The second band is observed at 300-400 nm may be assigned to the presence of carbon nanoparticles [43][44]. But in the water washed MgO-AlPO spectrum, the intensity of the both bands are reduced. This means that many of the diketone and carbon nanoparticles are removed when the catalyst is washed with water. 4.5 Proposed Mechanism for the partial CO
(Scheme S3). But the non-pillared CO pillared CO decomposition. In this mechanism the CO intermediate has positive charge and it is neutralized by releasing the oxygen to produce CO. The mechanism of non-pillared CO that two acidic sites cooperation is essential for complete decomposition of CO O and capturing the carbon. 
  This study has revealed the intercrossing of two frameworks such as MgO and AlPO for producing a novel framework with four types of acidic sites. This is characterized by XRD, FT-IR, BET, TGA and TEM analyses. The XRD pattern and crystal structure proved that the two frameworks are intercrossed to form a novel framework material (Kankarlite-2) and producing multiple active sites such as superoxide ion, oxyanion, octahedral Al tetrahedral framework and MgO is in octahedral framework. The BET analysis is confirmed 
 decomposition is produced more CO molecules (Scheme S4). It is a partial that the formation of double mesopores. The surface area is 59m cm/g. Though the surface area and pore volume are less, the catalytic activity is too high due to the cooperative effect of active sites. The TGA and TEM analysis are confirmed that the intercrossing of two frameworks. The material is applied for CO observed that the CO to release oxygen and produced a new molecule of Octa allene diketone (C decomposition is required two acidic sites cooperation and if the CO acidic site to produce CO and O. In this view, the superoxide ion, octahedral Al are having more than two acidic sites. So these acidic sites are responsible for complete decomposition (multi-molecular pillared decomposition). But the oxyanion is responsible for partial decomposition to CO. The fact is confirmed from the temperature effect of the reaction which produced around 75% of O 25% oxyanion and 75% of other three multiple active sites. The decomposition is depending on acidic sites but not depends on surface area which is proved by a new formula P . The catalyst reduces the CO conventional methods. The intercrossing framework of MgO and AlPO catalyst for CO allene diketone molecule. 