 predicting multiphase chemical kinetics due to the complex coupling of reaction and mass transport across a phase boundary (i.e. interface). Here we describe a framework for predicting multiphase kinetics that embeds the elementary kinetic steps of reaction, solvation and diffusion into a coarse grain spatial description of two phases. The model is constructed to bridge the short-timescale interfacial dynamics observed in molecular simulations with the longer timescales observed in kinetic experiments. A simple set of governing differential equations is presented, which when solved numerically or analytically, yield accurate predictions of multiphase kinetics in microdroplets. Although the equations are formulated for gasliquid reactions, the underlying conceptual framework is general and can be applied to transformations in other two-phase systems (solid-liquid, liquid-liquid, etc.). 
Chemical Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720 
I. Introduction chemist mixing, stirring, and heating reactants in various proportions. Wet chemistry of this type, involving a chemical reaction in a single phase, is vanishingly rare in natural systems—from the environment that surrounds us to the mechanics of our own biology. On a global scale, multiphase processes on the Earth’s surface and in its atmosphere span an incredibly broad range, from familiar phenomena like the hydrologic cycle and weather patterns to more subtle effects like the influence of ground emissions on cloud formation and the oxidizing capacity of the atmosphere. Multiphase processes are central for biology, as virtually all organisms rely on gas-liquid or solidliquid exchange with the environment to maintain homeostasis. The boundary of the cell wall permits the electrochemical gradient necessary for cellular function and recent work has highlighted an emerging understanding of liquid-liquid phase separation within the cell. Furthermore, solute transport across polymer membranes to achieve selective separations is of immense technological importance for future clean energy applications. understanding how multiphase transformations emerge from the complex coupling of chemical reactions with mass transport across phase boundaries remains a substantial challenge. using a discretized or “compartmentalized” representation of chemistry spanning two phases. These methods grew out of explicit kinetic simulations of multiphase chemistry in aerosols, emulsions Kinetiscope©. realistic framework for predicting multiphase aerosol chemistry. Here we expand upon this framework to include more sophisticated descriptions of gas and liquid phase diffusion. The result is a “compartmentalized” description of kinetics expressed as a simple set of coupled differential equations, which when solved numerically (or using approximate closed form solutions) accurately predict surface and bulk uptake coefficients as well as multiphase reaction kinetics in aerosols and droplets. Although the current work is formulated for gas-liquid reactive uptake, the conceptual features of the framework can be readily adapted to kinetics in liquid-liquid, liquidsolid, or gas-solid systems. 
II. A Compartmentalized Description of Multiphase Chemical Kinetics 
 and droplets implemented in a stochastic reaction diffusion simulator, framework. At equilibrium and in the absence of a reaction, X (in this case a gas phase molecule) is partitioned between the gas (g) and liquid (bulk) phases. The concentrations of X in the gas 
([X by a Henry’s Law constant, ( to the widespread use of molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, the concentration of X at the 
Figure 1: Concentration profiles of gas phase solute X and liquid phase solute Y in a two-phase system. (A) For the case where there is no reaction the equilibrium concentrations of X in phase 1 (black), phase 2 (green) and at the biphasic interface (red) are governed by Henry’s law constants (H state concentration profiles and gradients in X that form in the gas (blue) and liquid phases (purple) due to its reaction with Y. Also shown are compartments of length (L), which are distinguished by changes or gradients in X. 
As illustrated in Fig. 1A, any multiphase kinetic model starts with the same basic 
]) and liquid ([X]) are governed by differences in solvation free energies and described droplet interface (i.e., X simulations show that this is often not the case, with trace gases exhibiting negative surface solvation free energies relative to the gas and liquid phases and thus, as illustrated in Fig. 1A, increased density the interface (i.e.,  consisting of a single mutually soluble species X, can be envisioned as three distinct spatial regions or compartments each with a characteristic [X] (i.e., [X during the reaction is perturbed as illustrated in Fig. 1B. Depending upon the surface activity of Y and the overall reaction rate relative to the mass transport timescales, concentration gradients of X (and potentially Y) can form at the gas and liquid sides of the interface. This means that concentrations of X in the gas and liquid phase are no longer uniform as depicted in Fig. 1 A and additional compartments or regions are needed to represent these gradients. For example, fast surface reactions readily deplete the local gas phase concentration above the interface such that [X] > [X produce gradients in X such that [X our approach is to coarse grain the system into a few key, kinetically relevant regions or compartments. concentrations of X and Y within each region, rather than attempting to capture the explicit functional form of the concentration gradients. These “kinetically relevant” regions represent places where the concentrations of X or Y are distinct or where there is the potential for gradients in X and Y to form due to the strong coupling of reaction and diffusion. These compartments (Fig. 1B), each with a characteristic spatial dimension, correspond to the gas phase, gas-surface region, the interface, the reacto-diffusive volume below the interface and the inner core of the droplet. width of the density profile in MD simulations of the air-water interface. reacto-diffusive compartment (L
In the presence of a liquid solute Y that reacts with X, the equilibrium concentration of X 
Rather than dividing the two phase system up into a large number of small regions or layers, 
The interface length or thickness (δ) is assumed to be ~ 1 nm, which approximates the 
+ Y reaction and the bulk concentration of solute Y, respectively. The length of the core region for a spherical aerosol with radius, r, is L that evolve during a reaction as Y is consumed. For reactions that are slow relative to diffusion, L ~ r and hence the length of the core tends to zero as L “transition function” ( which closely approximates the reaction-diffusion length when   > , as shown in Fig. S1. and inner core (core) volumes, with respective subscript denotations indicated in parentheses. As noted above, a near-surface compartment can also be implemented if the gas dynamics near the surface are of interest. For simplicity we neglect this region and assume gas-phase diffusion occurs directly to and from the droplet interface as explored in depth in Sect. V.A, with further details included in Appendix A. These sections illustrate how the gas-phase itself is defined directly as acting upon the surface compartment, such that no explicit “gas” compartment is necessary to execute the model. elementary kinetic steps embedded in three compartments. These steps describe the uptake of X and its reaction with Y. In addition to these chemical equilibria and reaction steps, diffusion pathways are included that describe the transfer of X and Y between compartments. This description aims to connect continuum descriptions of diffusive transport of individual kinetic steps
, and [Y] are the liquid phase diffusion constant of X, the rate coefficient for the X 
The model described consists of three compartments: the surface (srf), reacto-diffusive (rd) 
 As shown in Fig. 2, our model of multiphase chemistry is formulated as a sequence of 
X diffuses to the near surface region (indicated with subscript gs) of the droplet or interface with a rate constant of  the surface compartment since, as noted above, we assume that diffusion between the interface and the near surface is instantaneous. The backward rate constant for gas phase diffusion away from the near surface (i.e., X
Figure 2: Conceptual diagram of the coarse grain kinetic framework. On the left, the multiphase system is divided up into kinetically relevant regions: gas (g), surface (s), reacto-diffusive (rd) volume and core (core). Embedded within these compartments are elementary kinetic steps that describe X adsorption (ads), desorption (des), solvation (solv) and desolvation (desolv). In addition, there are steps that describe gas phase diffusion of X ( the coupled equilibria that describe the partitioning of X between the gas, surface and bulk liquid. K described the surface partition of Y between the bulk and interface. 
As illustrated in Fig. 2, trace gas uptake and reaction occurs when a gas phase molecule interface (X probability that X phase. This pair of adsorption/desorption steps comprise the gas-surface equilibrium constant, , formulated as a Henry’s law coefficient specifically connecting the gas to the surface. Instead of desorption, X desolvate back to form X corresponding rate coefficients k equilibrium constant (i.e.,  undergo desolvation, X proportional to a diffusional rate constant,  diffusive volume back to the surface, or into the inner core of the aerosol becoming X be shown below, partitioning of X between the gas, interface and bulk liquid is described using the Langmuir equation and the Henry’s law constants illustrated in Fig. 2. 
Hinshelwood mechanism (X core of the droplet (X reaction ( diffusive and core regions of the droplet. Partitioning of Y between the bulk (Y (Y) is treated identically to that of X and is described by the kinetic steps of solvation/desolvation in the Langmuir equation (see Sect. V.C). Here we assume diffusion of Y in the solvent is rapid and remains uniformly distributed throughout the bulk regions (rd and core) of the droplet; [Y “trace gases” where [Y] >> [X]. A similar model framework can be used to treat simultaneous diffusion and reaction of both X and Y, as will be explored in future work. equilibrium governing the partitioning of X between the gas and interface ( equilibria that govern the partitioning X ( 2). These equilibria are coupled and respond dynamically to the presence of the X+Y reaction in each compartment. These steps and the associated differential equations embedded in the 
For a non-volatile solute (Y) the reaction with X occurs at the interface, via a Langmuir 
󰇜 need not be the same as that for a bulk reaction (󰇜 occurring in the reacto-
 In summary, in addition to the reaction (X+Y) and reversible diffusion steps there is an compartmentalized representation of the two-phase system are the basis for the kinetic model described below. 
III. Governing Equations loss of gas phase X or condensed phase Y. The majority of experiments don’t distinguish between surface and bulk concentrations, but rather only measure total concentrations of X and/or Y ([X
For a gas-liquid reaction, the rate law in Eq. (3) is proportional to the total uptake coefficient (γ the gas phase collision frequency computed for a droplet with radius (r), and the mean speed () of X in the gas phase. The total rate law and uptake coefficient in Eq. (3) can be expressed as a sum of the contributions from the three spatial regions (srf, rd, and core) described above, each of which contributes [Y
Solving Eqs. (4)-(6) for the uptake coefficient in each compartment yields, whose sum is γ
In most aerosol and droplet experiments, multiphase kinetics are quantified by either the 
] and [Y]) versus time, which can be expressed as a bimolecular rate law, 
The contributions of Eqs. (4)-(9) to  and  compartment (i.e., of the concentration and volume terms in Eqs. (4)-(9) is used to compute the fractional contribution of each compartment to the [Y
The six differential equations that describe the evolution of [X] and [Y] illustrated mechanistically in Fig. 2 are, 
In Sect. V we discuss in detail how the rate coefficients that appear in these expressions are obtained for a given system. The 󰇡
), compartment volumes (V, V and V) and reactant concentrations in each 
Langmuir adsorption sites at the interface, where molec. used to describe the surface partitioning of X and Y is provided in Sects. V.B and V.C, respectively. Lastly, a stoichiometric factor (S) is included in Eq. (20) to provide a simple way to approximate the role of secondary chemistry when the loss of Y relative to X differs from 1:1. In Sect. VI, we numerically solve Eqs. (15)-(20) and validate the model results against prior experimental measurements of multiphase ozone reactions with a variety of aqueous solutes in microdroplets. 
IV. Analytical Solutions of [Y] can be obtained by applying steady-state approximations derivations are shown in Sect. SI-2 of the Supplementary Information. The final closed form kinetic equations, shown below, are obtained using Lambert W functions reported. MATLAB (W function) and Python (lambertw function) using built in algorithms. Although we refer to our expressions as “closed-form” or “analytical,” there appears to be no consensus as to whether Lambert W functions are strictly included in the general definition of closed-form solutions. Nevertheless, we adopt this convention in light of previous terminology. computing “steady-state” expressions for the trace gas X within each compartment. The general method can be summarized by first applying the steady-state approximation to Eqs. (15)-(19), to yield an expression for the concentration of X in each region [X These steady-state expressions [X integrated by separation of variables and solved for [Y concentration [X the final equations are shown below with a full derivation provided in Sect. SI-2 of the Supplementary Information. diffusive volume is, 
) and δ is interface thickness (1 nm). A full discussion of how the Langmuir framework is 
 Lambert W functions can be computed in Mathematica (Productlog Function), 
The analytical expression for loss of Y due to reaction with X occurring only in the reactowhere obtained by considering reactivity in the rd region alone and neglecting the reactivity of the core region. This approximation is generally valid since, by definition, the majority of bulk reactivity occurs within the rd region. Reaction in the core accounts for up to ~10% of the total reactions for the special case where the 
The complete expression that includes reactions at both the surface and within the rd region is obtained by replacing 
  Eq. (21) 
 is the initial concentration of solute Y. As discussed in Sect. SI-2, Eq. (21) is where  is defined as in Eq. (22). While it is clear these equations are cumbersome, we show in Sect. VI.B that they faithfully approximate the full numerical solutions of Eqs. (15)-(20). For further discussion on the approximations and assumptions made in obtaining Eqs. (21)-(23), see Sect. SI-2 of the Supplementary Information. discussed above are substituted into the uptake equations (Eqs. (7)-(9)) to obtain the following expression for  where, lengthy, these expressions are general and account for cases where trace gas uptake is limited by either gas or liquid phase diffusion, or when there is strong coupling between surface and bulk reactions. Importantly, these expressions link the macroscopic quantity of an uptake coefficient (i.e., the fraction of collisions that yield a reaction) with the microscopic elementary steps of gas accommodation, reaction and diffusion. We note that Eq. (26) expressing uptake due to reaction in 
    Eq. (26)  
 in Eq. (24) is computed using the Langmuir equation as described in Sect. V.C. Although the inner droplet core assumes that the interfacial X species denoted by (ads) and (sb) are equilibrated with the gas phase and equal to  core uptake since for this reactivity to have much significance, the reacto-diffusive length must be on the order of the droplet radius, in which case the droplet interface is virtually in equilibrium with the gas phase. As we have shown previously, simpler for limiting cases often encountered in the laboratory. In Sect. VI we validate these closed form expressions against the numerical solutions to Eqs. (15)-(20) as well as prior experimental data on multiphase ozone kinetics in microdroplets. 
(15)-(20) and the closed form expressions, Eqs. (21)-(27). 
A. Gas Phase Diffusion of X: ( r is, where  “continuum” regime. We implement diffusion in the model as two reversible steps described by a rate coefficient, where  by a relevant volumetric term and the gas concentration [X outer boundary b and inner boundary a as provided by Crank:
The transport equation describing the diffusion of X to the boundary of a sphere of radius 
 is the gas phase diffusion constant of X. Here,  is the molecular flow in the 
 is obtained by analyzing the origin of transport equation Eq. (28) and normalizing J 
J is derived using the expression for diffusion of species X through a spherical wall with where the inner boundary a = r and the concentrations are chosen to be . Setting the surface concentration at r is completely depleted. For the outer boundary b, we consider the limit b → ∞ to identify a limiting value for J approaches a minimum. In the limit b → ∞, Eq. (29) becomes, which is equivalent to Eq. (28). This expression is divided by the spherical shell volume of the surface to obtain a rate equation, where the surface volume can be approximated by the product of the spherical surface area and surface thickness δ when r >> δ. From Eq. (31), the rate of diffusion to the interface is, where the gas-diffusion rate coefficient is, 
This rate coefficient controls both the diffusion rate of X into the surface compartment generating illustrated in Fig. 2. This rate of diffusion is inherently coupled to the rate at which X may adsorb to the interface. An understanding of this phenomenon and a comparison of the current treatment with previous derivations by Fuchs and Sutugin
B. Trace Gas X Adsorption, Desorption, Solvation and Desolvation: (k governs larger-scale transport between two phases, and the adsorption/desorption terms in Fig. 2 that govern molecular-scale transport at an interface. First, we consider how the adsorption rate coefficient is related to the collision frequency of a gas X on the droplet interface. Appendix A 
󰇟󰇠 in this way provides the upper bound for the rate of diffusive transport where 
, but also the rate at which  diffuses away from the surface, re-generating , as 
Describing multiphase chemical kinetics requires accounting for both diffusion that unites this gas kinetic framework with a diffusional picture and ties this relationship back to macroscopic gas-transport descriptions. accommodation) to the surface is described by a Langmuir model, specific sites (site
The maximum volumetric site concentration, X (
 is computed such that the pseudo-first order adsorption rate is consistent with the collision frequency obtained by a simple Maxwellian picture of molecular translation, where  is the average velocity of X in the gas phase and  the sticking coefficient. The desorption rate coefficient,  is on the order of ~10-100 ps for many low-molecular weight gases on water surfaces under ambient atmospheric conditions. These lifetimes can be obtained through a variety of theoretical and experimental techniques. the liquid phase are described similarly, in R2 and R3. The overall Henry’s law coefficient for a gas dissolving into a bulk liquid ( a coupled equilibrium,
Once reactant X has diffused to the liquid surface, adsorption (i.e., thermal 
cm molec.) and the interface thickness (δ = 1 nm), 
The Henry’s law constant for X provides an important constraint for the rate coefficients where, and, the concentration of a X at the interface may be significantly different than both the gaseous and liquid-phase concentrations at equilibrium as illustrated in Fig. 1. Furthermore, they provide through Eqs. (36)-(39) an expression that links the forward and backward rate coefficients for adsorption, desorption, solvation and desolvation to the Henry’s law equilibrium constants. Although this constrains the ratios for solvation and adsorption (i.e., further information is needed to obtain the absolute values for  associated trajectories in MD simulations from our recent work From prior MD simulations for O    which corresponds to a volumetric density at the interface of yields, 
These “partial” Henry’s law coefficients (Eqs. (36) and (37)) are conceptually useful since 
, , and  can be obtained from potential of mean force calculations and 
Example Calculation Ouptake onto microdroplets: Here we provide a concrete example 
. As computed by Vieceli et al., the molecular area () for ozone is 1.85 nm, droplet surface can be computed by dividing the molecular flow J area to give, 
The flux expression Eq. (42) is augmented to define a rate of O the liquid by multiplying the flux by the surface-to-volume ratio of the interfacial compartment, 
The first (
For the case where adsorption of X occurs on every collision (i.e., σ =1,  is equivalent to  obtained by constraining k gas kinetic theory (Eqs. (45) and (46)) differ by only ~ 5%. This difference likely originates from assumptions made in defining  interface are coupled with the diffusional dynamics of gas transport to the interface is explored in detail in Appendix A. 
Fokker–Planck equation. 1.9x10 obtained from MD simulations is α = 9.7 x 10 cm molec.
An alternative way to compute  is from gas kinetic theory. The flux of O onto the 
) and second-order () collision rate coefficients are, 
  , the rate coefficients in Eq. (44) are, 
 is directly obtained from MD simulations or coarse grain dynamics using the 
 s. For reference the mass accommodation coefficient (α = k/(k + k).) 
 s in this example. 
C. Surface Partitioning of Solute Y ( elementary steps using a Langmuir adsorption model, where  and, and, 
We note that while adsorption of Y is described in step (R4) by the near-interfacial species Y in the current model this is equivalent to the adsorption of Y instantaneous mixing of species Y throughout the droplet and hence, not formally distinguished species Y described above (Eq. (37)). Values  and theoretical methods. Static and dynamic surface tension measurements are used to obtain values of  acids and alcohols values of  orders of magnitude and depend upon molecular structure. Nonlinear optical studies of air-water interfaces energy. Furthermore, MD simulations provide density profiles of solutes at the air-water interface that can constrain  within a Langmuir framework, the consequences of which have been discussed elsewhere.
D. Liquid Phase Diffusion of X: (
The partitioning of the non-volatile solute Y to and from the interface is described in two 
,Y, and Y. The Langmuir equilibrium constant (󰇜 is analogous to  for X 
 , ,  and . For example, Bleys and Joos found that for small 
 can also constrain values of  through determinations of the Gibbs Adsorption free described above, a diffusional description is used to describe the larger-scale transport of X and Y in the liquid phase. As shown below for the species X, we formulate liquid phase diffusion in a way that is analogous to a kinetic rate law. This description follows the same method used in Kinetiscope© where [X refer to the lengths of the respective, adjacent compartments (e.g., δ and L
A between the two compartments gives an expression for the molecular flow, or the number of molecules transferred per second, 
Dividing Eq. (51) by a volume yields a rate equation, where V corresponds to either compartment 1 or 2 (i.e., V the specific process considered. As shown below, the choice of V is determined by which process Eq. (52) is intended to describe. required as outlined in the two processes in Fig. 3. 
In addition to the microscopic kinetic steps that describe solvation and desolvation 
The diffusive flux between two compartments from Fick’s First Law is, 
] and [X] are the concentrations of X in compartments 1 and 2, respectively. L and L 
 is the liquid phase diffusion constant of X. Multiplying Eq. (50) by the cross-sectional area 
To fully describe diffusion between two adjacent compartments, four kinetic steps are 
Figure 3: Liquid diffusion between two compartments shown schematically as two elementary processes. In (1, left panel), X moves from compartment 1 to compartment 2 and species X a rate proportional to coefficient 
(2, right panel), the reverse process is shown with proportional constants  In actuality, the two processes illustrated in Fig. 3 occur simultaneously as the system equilibrates. 
Regardless of the initial conditions, the rate equations for concentrations [X
To calculate a specific term (e.g.  where, 
Importantly, V is defined by the derivative in Eq. (53) and represents the concentration change of X within V
Following the same derivation for  yields, 
This shows that within a given differential, e.g. Eq. (53), the forward and reverse diffusion rate coefficients are equal in magnitude and opposite in sign. Similarly, the forward and reverse rate constants in the differential for compartment 2 in Eq. (54) are, which is obtained using the same procedure albeit using V
 and  where, 
Eq. (64), the diffusion rate into the core, is obtained using the methods outlined above. This same formalism can be applied to represent the diffusion rate of Y case is not explicitly considered in the derivations shown above since we have broadly assumed the mixing time for species Y to be much faster than the reaction. However, for cases where depletion of Y near the interface is possible, an additional set of rates equations can be used, as we will demonstrate in future work. predicting multiphase reaction kinetics. Bulk rate coefficients used in this multiphase model are usually obtained from beaker-scale experiments or theoretical calculations usually under dilute conditions. As illustrated in Fig. 2, linking reactivity in beaker scale solutions of X and Y with the analogous multiphase reaction requires understanding all of the non-reactive steps that govern the partitioning of X and Y between various phases (i.e., gas, interface, and bulk). In previous models using a similar framework, we generally assume (in the absence of evidence to the contrary) that the surface reaction rate coefficient is equivalent to the bulk (i.e.,  good reasons to expect that this might not always be the case since the partial solvation at an interface can lower reaction barriers or induce more favorable molecular orientations for a reaction to occur. For example, recent work suggests that rate coefficients for condensation reactions are 100-10000 times faster at air-water and oil-water interfaces than in bulk solutions. Furthermore, as demonstrated recently by comparing model predictions and experiments, surface rate coefficients can be estimated for those cases where the partitioning of X and Y between phases can be adequately constrained.
A. Numerical Solutions kinetic measurements for three different systems. For this comparison, O analyzed on levitated microdroplets. The oxidation kinetics of aqueous droplets of maleic acid (MA),
 nitrite (NO), and iodide (I) are selected to illustrate a number of different 
Figure 4: Kinetic model results compared to measurements for three reactive systems. The left column shows kinetics for the ozone oxidation of aqueous (A) maleic acid, (B) nitrite and the (C) iodide. Model results include the full model in black (i.e., total = surface and bulk) along with the bulk-only model (bulk = rd and core) in blue and the surface-only model in red. The right column (D-F) shows for each the predicted time-dependent of [O complete set of experimental and model parameters. scenarios. These reactants span a large range of reactivities with ozone, with aqueous rate coefficients (see Table S1) ranging from k = 1.7 × 10
NO and k = 1.2 × 10 are obtained using the ND solve algorithm in Mathematica, experimental results shown in Fig. 4. Table S1 in the Supplementary Information provides the relevant experimental conditions and coefficients used for each reaction. References for and a discussion of the values in Table S1 can be found in Sec. SI-3. 
3, the full set of Eqs. (15)-(20) is evaluated and labeled “total” in Fig. 4. Total includes surface and bulk (rd and core) reactions In each case, the numerical predictions replicate the observed decay kinetics for maleic acid, nitrite and iodide. To ascertain the surface and bulk contributions to the total observed kinetics, a modified set of predictions are shown in Fig. 4, where only surface reactions (labeled “surface”) and only the bulk reactions (labeled “bulk”) are computed. The “surface” set is computed by removing all terms with  computed by removing terms with  reaction is predicted to have only a minor surface contribution, whereas the nitrite and iodide reactions display comparable reactive contributions from both the surface and the bulk. Due to the differences in the nitrite and iodide reactivities and surface propensities, however, the bulk reaction is slightly more favored in the case of NO studies, which did not include an explicit rd compartment, we underestimated the contribution of the bulk reaction to the multiphase kinetics of nitrite. concentration is a weighted sum of the O the core region, providing an average concentration throughout the entire droplet. For each system, O is significantly depleted relative to its Henry’s law value ( kinetics which dominate for much slower reactions. Henry’s law value during the reaction. For the faster rates of nitrite and iodide, ozone remains depleted throughout the entire reaction, with a moderate recovery observed in the NO and virtually no recovery for the I reaction-diffusion length of ozone at a given time, with severe depletion occurring for scenarios where the reaction-diffusion length is significantly smaller than the droplet radius throughout the reaction. 
To highlight the relative roles of the surface and bulk reaction for each case shown in Fig. loss from the example discussed above. Predictions of Eq. (23) are compared in Fig. 5 with the exact numerical solutions and the experimental iodide data shown in Fig. 4. We also include 
Figure 5: Closed form time-dependent expressions for [I and Eq. (21) (bulk reaction only). Analytical expressions are compared to the numerical evaluations described above and shown in Fig. 4. Two sets of experimental kinetics are included here, the first for the standard I including 1.6 mM of Triton-X100 (○). The presence of the surfactant completely inhibits the surface reaction in this case, demonstrated by agreement with the bulk-only models. For both sets of kinetics, [O predictions of the “bulk” only (i.e., rd compartment) closed form expression (Eq. (21)) and compare it with measurements of O which effectively shuts off the surface reaction. The comparison shown in Fig. 5 confirms that the closed form expressions closely replicate both the experimental data and the numerical solutions, and thus validates the approximations used in deriving these analytic functions. 
VI. Conclusions chemical kinetics. Unlike previous models (see review by Kolb et al.
The closed form expression in Eq. (23) is used to calculate the time-dependence of iodide 
The general approach described above establishes a framework for evaluating multiphase et. al. into a simple set of physically realistic elementary kinetic steps and equilibria. This kinetic description incorporates the interfacial dynamics and solvation free energies observed in MD simulations as well as continuum descriptions of mass transport. The resulting set of differential equations and expressions for uptake are embedded in a coarse grain description of kinetically relevant spatial regions in a two-phase system. The simple set of coupled differential equations, which when solved numerically or analytically, produce predictions that can be directly compared to experimental observations. The model provides a novel way to evaluate the contribution of interfacial and bulk phase reactions to uptake coefficients and the overall reaction kinetics, thus providing deeper insight into the multiphase mechanism, which is often not possible when considering experimental results alone. This framework appears to be general and likely transferrable to, for example, problems involving the transport of solutes across electrolyte/membrane interfaces or chemical reactions in coacervates.
Appendix A: Molecular and Continuum Descriptions of Gas Diffusion to an Interface and kinetic mass transfer of X to the gas-liquid surface. The rate equation describing diffusional transport is, where  which is transformed into a first-order rate coefficient by normalizing by the approximate surface volume 
The analogous rate equation describing kinetic or “collisional” mass transport to the interface is, 
), which use flux-based descriptions, our approach seeks to distill multiphase chemistry 
In the kinetic model described above we derive expressions that account for the diffusive 
 indicates the molecular flow in the “continuum” regime as previously defined in Eq. (30), 
 and gas concentration (see Sect. V.A): where  which is similarly recast as a first-order rate coefficient by normalizing by the approximate surface volume: 
Written out in kinetic steps, we describe the overall process using two reversible steps, where site discussed. The collision rate coefficient  interfacial adsorption process (AR2) occur simultaneously, and therefore, the concentration of near-surface species value. In the limit of complete surface loss after surface adsorption, the steady-state concentration 
Eq. (A7) denotes the “effective” concentration of X from the perspective of the interface. During adsorption and loss of X, the near-surface concentration r is small but becomes significantly depleted when r is large—since the loss of X due to interfacial adsorption becomes faster than what can be “replenished” by diffusional transport, which slows 
 indicates the molecular flow in the kinetic regime, 
 denotes a surface site for X, with maximum coverage given by  as previously 
 is, with increasing r as seen in Eq. (A3). From an alternative point of view, Eq. (A7) expresses that the near-surface gas concentration is related to the true gas concentration by a transport fractional term that expresses how much the near-surface gas behavior resembles the “molecularity” expected by the purely collisional description used for adsorption. As included in Eq. (A7), this can be expressed by a simple ratio of flux terms, where the true gas flux (J) divided by a reference flux (the molecular flux J matching to a boundary sphere of radius r + Δ for the elementary case where Δ = 0, expressed in terms of the Knudsen number
Note that Eq. (A8) can instead be represented as the fraction of the diffusional flux rather than kinetic flux, which applies under the continuum regime where: given the relation 
Although the gas-transport term in Eq. (A7) and Fuchs’ expression for Δ = 0 agree exactly, the transport Eq. (A7) can be slightly modified to agree with Fuchs’ general expression for a general boundary sphere of r + Δ. To accomplish this, we set up a simple expression that is in fact equivalent to Fuchs’ continuous description of boundary-sphere flux matching. We define a fluxmatching boundary condition by recognizing that the number of molecules that diffuse from the gas phase into the near-surface region must equal the sum of the number of molecules colliding with the droplet surface and diffusing back out into the outer gas phase, which can be rearranged to express the steady state concentration of near-surface gas concentration, analogous to Eq. (A7): 
This first observation is equivalent to that of Fuchs & Sutugin using the method of flux-
The gas-transport term in Eq. (A12) can be rearranged using the definition of the Knudsen number Kn to yield, where λ is the mean free path defined here as  or coupled-equilibria approach for describing near-gas concentrations within a shell of length  results in exactly the results of Fuchs & Sutugin the concentration profile at position r +  with boundary conditions set by an equivalent flux matching condition. agrees with the “Fuchs correction” used to account for diffusional “resistance” in the widelyapplied resistor formulation of multiphase kinetics. correction follows the expanded method outlined by Fuchs & Sutugin slightly adapted to agree with numerical solutions to the Boltzmann equation across the Kn range. For completeness, we include this adapted transport term, which includes an additional constant 0.283. We note that typically, the boundary sphere distance  is typically chosen to equal approximately the mean free path  which further simplifies Eq. (A12). As shown in Fig. 6A, the transport terms found in Eq. (A7), Eq. (A12), and Eq. (A14) are all numerically close to each other, differing only modestly in the transition regime. which, when analyzed in light of mechanistic steps AR1 and AR2, yields an identical gas-tosurface transport efficiency as described by the simplest case from Fuchs & Sutugin boundary sphere distance . To account for a nonzero boundary-sphere thickness , the rate coefficient for the diffusional process above can be modified to include the flux at distance r + , respective to the surface region by dividing by the surface volume: 
Fig. 6A summarizes these observations, providing results from Eqs. (A7) and (A12) compared to the Fuchs Correction Eq. (A14). For reference, Fig. 6B evaluates the radial dependence of  and 
 with  = 360 m/s,  = 0.18 cm/s, and  = 1 nm. 
Figure 6: (A) Comparison of diffusional descriptions, showing the fraction of collisional-type flux vs. droplet radius for the three descriptions in Eqs. (A7), (A12), and (A14). (B) Radial dependence of the kinetic coefficients k
 molec.) 
 molec. s) for X ) for X  molec. s) for X  molec. s) for Y ) for X ) for Y Reaction rate coefficient (cm molec. s) 
Supporting Information: Sec. SI-1 and Fig. S1 compares the transition function shown Eq (2) with L SI-3 and Table S1 provides the experimental details, rate and diffusion coefficients for validation of the model with the experimental data shown in Figs. 4 and 5. 
Acknowledgements: This work is supported by the Director, Office of Energy Research, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Chemical Sciences Division, Condensed Phase and Interfacial Molecular Sciences Program of the U.S. Department of Energy under contract No. DE-AC0205CH11231. The authors are grateful to Prof. David Limmer (UC Berkeley and LBNL), Dr. Kritanjan Polley (UC Berkeley and LBNL), Dr. Amr Dodin (UC Berkeley and LBNL) and Liron Cohen (UC Berkeley and LBNL) for insightful discussions. 
DATA AVAILABILITY upon reasonable request. 
References: 
Radius (cm) Volume (cm) 
. Sec. SI-2 shows the full derivation of the closed form expressions in Eqs. (21)-(23). Sec. 
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author 
Almeida, A. Amorim, F. Bianchi, M. Breitenlechner, et al., Oxidation Products of Biogenic 
Emissions Contribute to Nucleation of Atmospheric Particles, Science, 2014, 344, 717-721. present, and future, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2023, 23, 9765-9785. 
Biology of Intracellular Phase Transitions, Ann. Rev. Biophys., 2020, 49, 107-133. 
Science, 2017, 357, eaaf4382. Phase Separation and Biomolecular Condensates, Cell, 2019, 176, 419-434. Conversation: Membrane Separation Performance in Energy, Water, and Industrial 
Applications, ACS ES&T Engineering, 2024, 4, 277-289. description of how interfaces accelerate reactions in micro-compartments, Chem. Sci., 
2020, 11, 8533-8545. accelerated synthesis of azamonardine from dopamine and resorcinol, Chem. Sci., 2023, 
14, 6430-6442. Mechanism for Thiosulfate Oxidation by Ozone in Aqueous Environments, Environ. Sci. 
Technol., 2024, 58, 18959-18968. Surface and Bulk Reactivity: Concentration-Dependent Kinetics of Iodide Oxidation by 
Ozone in Microdroplets, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2024, 128, 8970-8982. Timescales of Multiphase Ozonolysis Reactions, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2022, 126, 4991-5010. Uptake and Reaction, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2022, 126, 7291-7308. https://hinsberg.net/kinetiscope/authors.html, (accessed 01-21, 2025). a kinetic double layer model (K2-SUB): oxidation of oleic acid by ozone, Atmos. Chem. 
Phys., 2010, 10, 4537-4557. chemistry and gas-particle interactions (K2-SURF): Degradation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons exposed to O<sub>3</sub>, NO<sub>2</sub>, H<sub>2</sub>O, OH and 
NO<sub>3</sub>, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2009, 9, 9571-9586. interactions in aerosols and clouds (KM-GAP): linking condensation, evaporation and chemical reactions of organics, oxidants and water, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2012, 12, 2777-
2794. bulk chemistry (KM-SUB): the influence of interfacial transport and bulk diffusion on the oxidation of oleic acid by ozone, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2010, 10, 3673-3691. 
Shiraiwa and J. P. Reid, Accurate Prediction of Organic Aerosol Evaporation Using Kinetic Multilayer Modeling and the Stokes–Einstein Equation, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2021, 125, 34443456. 
Boy, E. Swietlicki, B. Svenningsson, A. Zelenyuk and J. Pagels, Modelling nonequilibrium secondary organic aerosol formation and evaporation with the aerosol dynamics, gas- and particle-phase chemistry kinetic multilayer model ADCHAM, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2014, 14, 7953-7993. oxidation by ozone at the surface of aqueous microdroplets, Chem. Sci., 2024, 15, 736-756. 
Atmospherically Relevant Gases at the Air/Water Interface: Free Energy Profiles of Aqueous Solvation of N2, O2, O3, OH, H2O, HO2, and H2O2, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2004, 108, 11573-11579. 
Dynamics Simulations of Atmospheric Oxidants at the Air-Water Interface: Solvation and Accommodation of OH and O3, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 15876-15892. particles of various shapes and into falling drops, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1951, 47, 10141023. 
Gases in Liquid-Water Clouds, NATO ASI Series: Chemistry of Multiphase Atmospheric Systems, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1986. liquid droplets, Atmos. Environ. A, Gen. Top., 1991, 25, 2371-2383. model for reactive transformations of aerosol particles, Geophys. Res. Lett., 2002, 29, 5751-57-54. the gas-liquid interface, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 13007-13020. 
A. Orcajo, Lambert W function based closed-form expressions of supercapacitor electrical variables in constant power applications, Energy, 2021, 218, 119364. to Climate Change, Wiley, 2016. 
J. R. Brock, Pergamon, 1971, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-016674-2.50006-6, p. 1. Am. Chem. Soc., 1918, 40, 1361-1403. and activation energies influencing gas–surface interactions and multiphase chemical kinetics, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2024, 24, 3445-3528. 5001. for submicron aerosols, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 4897-4901. Accommodation at Liquid–Vapor Interfaces, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2024, 128, 4148-4157. J. Phys. Chem., 1985, 89, 1027-1032. with Femtosecond Second Harmonic Generation Spectroscopy, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 
110, 14060-14073. Data, 2009, 54, 1981-1985. Solutions:  The Jones−Ray Effect Revisited, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 15446-15452. Ladame, C. M. Marques and A. D. Griffiths, Enhanced Chemical Synthesis at Soft 
Interfaces: A Universal Reaction-Adsorption Mechanism in Microcompartments, Phys. 
Rev. Lett., 2014, 112, 028301. 
Zymonic Acid Formation from Pyruvic Acid at the Interface of Aqueous Nanodroplets, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2024, 15, 11131-11138. 
Reaction Kinetics for Pyruvic Acid Condensation at the Air–Water Interface in Aqueous Microdroplets, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2023, 145, 22317-22321. condensation kinetics in aqueous microdroplets driven by coupled surface reactions and gas-phase partitioning, Chem. Sci., 2024, 15, 13429-13441. and oxidative aging of aqueous maleic acid aerosol droplets and the dependence on relative humidity, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2014, 118, 5680-5691. phase ozone in an aqueous droplet levitated by laser tweezers (optical trap): is there any evidence for enhanced surface reaction?, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 2734-2741. 
Aqueous Microdroplets, ChemRxiv, 2024, DOI: 10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-mj9gg. 
Garrett, C. George, P. T. Griffiths, D. R. Hanson, et al., An overview of current issues in the uptake of atmospheric trace gases by aerosols and clouds, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2010, 10, 10561-10605. 
Can Accelerate Reactions─Coacervate Protocells as Catalytic Microcompartments, Acc. Chem. Res., 2024, 57, 1885-1895. submicron sulfuric acid aerosol and the implications for the lower stratosphere, J. Geophys. Res.: Atmos, 1996, 101, 9063-9069. 
Uptake by Liquid Surfaces, Progress in Reaction Kinetics and Mechanism, 2002, 27, 1-46. 