A concise synthesis of multiply fused phenanthroline diamide (fused-PTDA) by palladium-catalyzed intramolecular C–H arylation. Highly efficient and selective extraction performance of fused-PTDA toward early lanthanides
Towa Asano, Tohru Kobayashi,
Department of Chemical Science and Engineering, Kobe University, 1-1 Rokkodai, Nada, Kobe 657-8501, Japan 
Research Center for Membrane and Film Technology, Kobe University, 1-1 Rokkodai, Nada, Kobe 657-8501, Japan 
Research Institute for Environmental Management Technology, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Onogawa 16-1, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan 
Actinide Sciences Research Group, Materials Sciences Research Center, Japan Atomic Energy Agency, 1-1-1 Koto, Sayo-cho, Sayo-gun, Hyogo 679-5148, Japan 
Synchrotron Radiation Research Center, National Institute for Quantum Science and Technology(QST), 1-1-1 Kouto, Sayo-cho, Sayo-gun, Hyogo 679-5148, Japan 
Abstract The reaction of phenanthroline diamide bearing a bromoaryl moiety on the amide substituent in the presence of palladium catalyst proceeded efficiently to afford multiplyfused phenanthroline derivatives through intramolecular C–H arylation. The obtained diamide derivatives was found to extract lanthanide remarkably highly efficiently with distribution ratio (D: up to ca. 500) and it was also found show the metal-selective extraction (separation factor SF = up to 4.4). 
 Yuki Nakanishi, Shoichi Sugita, Kentaro Okano, Hirokazu Narita, 
Introduction Recycle of rare metals has attracted increasing interest recently in connection with the utilization of resources. Much efforts have been devoted to the efficient recovery of metal resources. Solvent extraction has been an effective tool for the recovery of metals and the development of metal-specific extracting agent has been our major concern. Recovery of rare-earth elements is particularly important due to the use of those as a wide range of electronic devices, which remarkably increase the demand recently. difficulty in the metal-selective separation of rare-earth due to the similarity of there chemical properties, currently used extraction process employing phosphorous acid derivatives derivatives has recently attracted remarks as a selective and highly efficient extractant for rare-earth metals. Construction of organic skeleton of complex structures is of great concern in synthetic chemistry. Transition metal catalysis plays a key role in the formation carbon-carbon and carbon-heteroatom bonds. bond has attracted major concern recently in conjunction with the point of atom efficiency and step efficiency, etc. intramolecular manner, formation of fused ring structures. Accordingly, our concern has centered to the concise preparation of heteroaromatic ring structure employing transition metal catalysis and we have been engaged in the application of C–H bond functionalization for the purpose of the construction of a variety of heteroaromatic compounds. functionalization has been an attractive issue in organic synthesis to build a ring structure in a facile manner and the application to several heteroaromatic molecules including pyridines and their more fused analogs would also be a significant challenge to form a fused heteroaromatic skeleton. Recent publication on the extraction of lanthanides with fused phenanthroline amide derivatives by Popova and coworkers our continuing separate researches. We herein describes palladium-catalyzed annulative formation of fused phenanthroline through the C–H functionalization reaction and our preliminary studies on several metal extraction with thus obtained fused phenanthrolines. 
 requires multiple stages to guarantee the metal purity. Phenanthroline 
Results and discussion Synthesis of phenanthroline 2,9-dicalboxamide 4 was performed by the reaction of the acid chloride 2 of phenanthroline-2,9-dicarboxylic acid 1, which was subjected to the reaction with thionyl chloride, with N-alkylated 2-bromoaniline derivative 3. The reaction was found to proceed smoothly to afford 4 in good to excellent yields. diamide bearing no bromo group at the 2-position of the benzene ring 5 was prepared in a similar manner. The related mono amide 6 (X = Br) and 6' (X = H) were also synthesized. The obtained amide 4 was then subjected to the intramolecular C–H coupling reaction at the 3-position of phenanthroline and at the C–Br bond of the aniline moiety. examined the reaction with 4a under similar conditions shown in previous C–H arylation with pyridine derivatives. mol% of palladium acetate, 2.0 equivalents of tetra-n-butylammonium bromide, and 2.0 equivalents of potassium carbonate in N, N-dimethylacetamide (DMA) as a solvent at 110 °C for 16 h, the C–H coupling reaction proceeded to afford the multiply fused diamide 7a in 85% yield. The measurement of 8.96 ppm assigned as the hydrogen atom at the 4 and 7-positions of the phenanthroline ring suggesting that C–H coupling took place at the 3 and 8-positions. 
Scheme 1. Synthesis of multiply fused phenanthroline diamide and the related compounds 
Several amide derivatives 7 bearing different alkyl substituent and a substituent at the 4position of aniline were also subjected to the C–H coupling reaction in a similar manner and found that the coupling reaction proceeded smoothly to afford a variety of multiply fused diamides. The result is summarized in Table 1. The coupling reaction proceeded smoothly in good to excellent yields irrespective of the effect of alkyl substituents and the substituent on the aniline moiety. 
Table 1. Synthesis of multiply fused phenanthroline diamide derivatives by palladiumcatalyzed C–H arylation 
We have attempted to carry out the C–H coupling reaction with a reduced amount of catalyst loading of palladium, however, the reaction was found to proceed much slower. The reaction was examined with diamide 4a (R = 2-ethylhexyl; R' = H). When the amount of Pd(OAc) took place with the use of 1.0 mol% of Pd(OAc) We thus studied the effect of the ligand of palladium. Among a variety of ligand examined, the use of Buchwald-type phosphines presence of 2.5 mol% Pd(OAc) product 7a. ligand (35%). Remarkably improved yields were observed in the use of CyJohnPhos (81%), PhDavePhos (97%), and tricylohexylphosphine (85%). 
Table 2. The reaction of 4a catalyzed by palladium in the presence of Buchwald-type phosphine ligands entry 
We then studied the reaction of the related phenanthroline monoamide 6a under similar conditions. However, the coupling reaction was found to take place much less efficiently. When the reaction was carried out 10 mol% of Pd(OAc) yield of the coupling product 8a was found to decrease to 31% accompanied by the recovery of starting amide 6a (31%). The reaction at the elevated temperatures (130 °C and 150 °C) resulted in little improvement. Although the addition of phosphine ligand was also examined, improvement of the yield of 8a was hardly observed as found in the 
 was reduced to 5.0 mol%, the yield of 7a decreased to 67% and no reaction 
 The yield of 7a was slightly improved when JackiePhos was employed as a case of the formation of diamide 7a (See Supporting Information). The optimum yield was observed in the use of Pd(OCOCF of catalyst loading was the requirement. 
Scheme 2. Cyclization reaction of phenanthroline monoamide 6 catalyzed by Pd(OCOCF
Employing thus obtained phenanthroline amide derivatives 7 we next performed the extraction studies of lanthanides. A mixture of 14 lanthanides(III) nitrate (La to Lu) where pH was arranged to 3.0. The resulting aqueous phase was extracted into the 1.0 mM organic solution of phenanthroline ligand 7 in 1,2-dichloroethane by shaking at 25 °C for 90 min. The extraction performance was analyzed by ICP–MS with the remained aqueous solution of lanthanide and shown as distribution ratio D of each metal. The selectivity of lanthanides was expressed with separation factor SF, which was defined by the ratio of D of the corresponding metals. Figure 1 shows the result of extraction with the multiply fused phenanthroline 7a–7c for the comparison of the effect of alkyl substituent at the amide nitrogen. The result shows that phenanthroline diamide with the cyclized structure extracts early lanthanides 
Sm efficiently whereas extraction of ratio for La of diamide 7c bearing longer alkyl chain (R = D = 131, while D Since the D value of 7 decreased as the increase of the atomic number of lanthanide, the different D values between early lanthanides was observed and thus appeared marked separation factor in 
Figure 1. Extraction of lanthanides La–Lu with cyclized diamide 7. The distribution ratio D was measured by ICP-MS analyses 
Worthy of note is that the preferentially high extraction of the cyclized diamide 7c for early lanthanides compared with that of acyclic diamide 5 (R = in Figure 2. A high distribution ratio of early lanthanides was not observed in acyclic 5 only resulting in mostly equal extraction of all of lanthanides. The extraction performance of 5 were much inferior to those of cyclic diamide 7c and the preferential extraction of early lanthanides was not observed. 
Figure 2. Extraction of lanthanides with phenanthroline diamide 7c and the cyclization precursor 5 
Figure 3 shows the extraction of lanthanides in 7c with that of the related monoamide of cyclized 8 (R = monoamide analog 8 bearing the same alkyl and aryl substituents. The result suggested that specific extraction of early lanthanides in 7c was only found in the diamide structure, while the cyclized monoamide 8 showed mostly equal extraction in 14 lanthanides (SF
Figure 3. Difference of the extraction performance between cyclized diamide 7c and the related monoamide 8 
 = 1.3). 
Table 3 summarizes the results of the distribution ratio and the separation factor of 7 with various substituent at the benzene ring of the aniline moiety. The D value of La and SF of Pr/Nd was shown as a representative example. The performance was found to depend on the substituent structure on the anilide moiety. An electron donating group on the benzene ring suggested superior distribution ratio D, while an electron withdrawing chloro group showed a lower D value. Multiply fused diamide bearing a methoxy group 7f and a tbutyl group 7h showed rather high distribution ratio (D
Table 3. Extraction of lanthanides with phenanthroline diamide 7 bearing different substituent at the 4-position of the anilide moiety 
We consider that such high extraction and selectivity to early lanthanides are attributed by the fused structure of phenanthroline ring, which limits rotation of the carbon–carbon single bond between pyridine rings. In addition, the formation of the cyclic structure of amide further improves the conformationally rigid structure of 7. Since the further fused benzene also enhances the planarity, a remarkably superior extraction of a specific lanthanide ion would be achieved, accordingly.  Summary We have shown facile synthesis of multiply fused phenanthroline diamides, which extract lanthanides highly efficiently. The fused diamide derivatives extracted early lanthanides more selectively and efficiently than the related monoamide. Such a simple and diversityoriented synthetic protocol allowed the preparation of diamide derivatives with a wide range of structural analogs and thus the synthesis can lead to the tuning of the extraction performances. 
Acknowledgment This work is based on results obtained from a project, JPNP17001, subsidized by the New Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization (NEDO). 