Abstract processing, where it is used for remediation of mining effluents, and for studying aerosol chemistry, where its fast reaction rate makes it an excellent model reaction. Although thiosulfate ozonation has been studied since the 1950’s, challenges remain in developing a realistic reaction mechanism that can satisfactorily account for all observed products with a sequence of elementary reaction steps. Here, we present novel measurements using trapped microdroplets to study the pH-dependent thiosulfate ozonation kinetics. We detect known products and intermediates, including SO literature. However, we identify S accepted mechanism does not directly explain observed pH effects. Thus, we develop a new mechanism, which incorporates S the pH-dependence of thiosulfate ozonation. The proposed mechanism is tested using a kinetic model benchmarked to the experiments presented here, then compared to literature data. We demonstrate good agreement between the proposed thiosulfate ozonation mechanism and experiments, suggesting that the insights in this paper can be leveraged in wastewater treatment and in understanding potential climate impacts. 
Chemical Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720 
The ozone oxidation, or ozonation, of thiosulfate is an important reaction for wastewater 
Synopsis This study addresses the pH-dependent ozone oxidation of thiosulfate, a reaction with applications in mining wastewater remediation and aerosol chemistry. Keywords Mining effluent, remediation, atmospheric aerosols, ozonation, polythionates, sulfur oxyions, pHdependence 
1. Introduction contaminants of emerging concern (CEC) due to their indirect aquatic toxicity. As such, a need for more complete thiosalt reaction mechanisms has been identified. volcanic craters environments (Figure 1A). They can also be formed in mines due to the incomplete oxidation of sulfur during the processing of sulfur-containing ores (Figure 1B) such as pyrite (FeS often called “the tailing”, is transferred (Figure 1C) to tailing storage facilities (TSFs) and treated prior to release into the natural environment (Figure 1D). Typical thiosalt concentrations produced during mining operations are likely highly variable due to differences in mining practices and regulations, but one study by Rolia and Tan in 1985 measured concentrations from ~4 to 18 mM. Due to their lack of direct toxicity, thiosalts are often left to naturally oxidize during storage, but sensitivity to the TSF environment can result in incomplete oxidization. releases the tailings, or is decommissioned, remaining thiosalts enter the environment, where further oxidation by air, bacteria, and sunlight is linked to increased acidic toxicity in natural waters. breaches (Figure 1E) including the Córrego do Feijão iron ore mine in Brazil. have recently come under scrutiny, and improved thiosalt oxidation processes may be required to meet new regulations.
Thiosalts, or incompletely oxidized sulfur compounds, have recently been classified as 
Figure 1. The lifecycle of thiosulfate in the environment. Thiosulfate, and other thiosalts, have been identified in (A) volcanic crater lakes, effluents. the wastewater is treated to remove known contaminants. After treatment, these wastewaters may be released to the natural environment (D), but there have also been TSF failures have led to wastewater directly entering the environment (E). Sulfur species from volcanic run off (A), treated mining waters (D), and/or untreated mining waters (E) can then join large bodies of natural water such as lakes (F) and oceans (G), where breaking waves can create aqueous aerosols (H), exposing sulfur species to ozone and a variety of pH environments. directly investigated, H other polythionates once incorporated in aqueous aerosols. mining effluents, with thiosulfate being the most common. microbubbles for mining water treatment appears to be gaining momentum, with multiple recent laboratory and pilot studies,
Specifically, Takizawa et al. multiple products in neutral environments, but selectively produces sulfate in alkaline environments, which the currently accepted mechanism cannot fully explain. The exact speciation of thiosalts can be important for predicting environmental impacts, thus the role of pH in the ozone oxidation of thiosulfate must be better understood.
Thiosulfate (SO), trithionate (SO), and tetrathionate (SO) are all common thiosalts in uptake studies, and their rich chemistry, remain one of the largest uncertainties in global climate modeling, the ozone oxidation of thiosulfate is fast, making it an excellent model reaction to study aerosol processing. any large body of water (Figure 1F and G). undergoing several transformations, including changes in pH (Figure 1H). atmosphere, fully oxidized thiosulfate (i.e., sulfate) can have significant effects on climate forcing, production of sulfate. years) stratospheric aerosols formed during volcanic eruptions, which will contain H water (Figure 1I). been proposed as a geoengineering effort to offset climate change, meaning the oxidation of thiosalts may have significant implications for any such SAIs. The pH-dependent reaction mechanism for the ozone oxidation of thiosulfate will thus be important for the mining community, the atmospheric chemistry community, and potential SAI designs. 
Thiosulfate is also used as a quenching agent in ozonation studies, as a scavenger in ozone 
 and incompletely oxidized thiosulfate may encounter ozone, resulting in the downstream 
Although it has not been directly investigated, thiosulfate may also form in long-lived (up to 3 
The currently accepted reaction mechanism invokes three primary reaction steps: 
 in water can then form bisulfite and sulfite via a coupled equilibrium: which is governed by the pKa of hydrated SO can react with ozone to form sulfate or undergo a reversible disproportionation reaction with tetrathionate: demonstrated by Takizawa, et al. reactions R1-R3. which we hypothesize could be due to the surface enrichment of ozone. Ozone is relatively insoluble in bulk water but can be up to 100 times more concentrated at the water surface compared with the bulk. limited, while the overall mechanism is likely reaction-limited in environments with high surfaceto-volume ratios (e.g., ozone microbubble processing and atmospheric aerosols). replicating the high surface-to-volume ratio of ozone microbubble processing and atmospheric aerosol environments. We study the reaction as a function of gas-phase ozone concentration and bulk-solution pH to replicate the varied mining and/or natural environments. Measured pHdependent reaction kinetics are used to propose a new, more detailed mechanism for the ozone oxidation of thiosulfate and the proposed mechanism is benchmarked against the experiments presented here. Finally, the proposed mechanism is compared to prior literature data to ensure that the proposed mechanism explains both droplet and bulk chemistry. 
However, this mechanism does not account for the pH-dependent product distributions 
Furthermore, Hsu, et al. showed that the reaction may be enhanced at droplet surfaces, 
Here, we study the pH-dependent ozone oxidation of thiosulfate in levitated microdroplets, 
2.1. Experiment which are then individually analyzed by mass spectrometry with an open-port sampling interface (OPSI-MS), the QET is housed in an environmentally controlled chamber and droplets are subjected to a constant flow (550 cm Microdroplets are generated co-axially to the QET trapping rods by a piezo-electric dispenser (Microfab, MJ-ABP-01) with a 30 μm orifice and charged with a +450 V DC bias by an induction electrode immediately after generation. 10s to 100s of droplets can be trapped in the upper QET region and individually transferred to the lower QET region for sizing. Mie scattering is used to size the droplets by illuminating them with a 532 nm laser.
Figure 2. Experimental schematic of the quadrupole electrodynamic trap (QET) and (inset) the open-port sampling interface (OPSI) to the mass spectrometer. Adapted from Ref. permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. flow carries it to the open-port sampling interface (OPSI). The OPSI consists of an outer tube 
A quadrupole electrodynamic trap (QET) is used to trap and react arrays of microdroplets, 
During an experiment, one droplet at a time is ejected from the QET, and the constant gas connected to the solvent source and an axial inner tube leading to the mass spectrometer. The inner tube is connected to a Thermo-Fischer HESI-II heated-electrospray source, where sheath gas flow over the inner tube in the HESI creates a pressure differential, drawing the solvent and analyte into the analysis region of the Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Inc.). The solvent delivery rate (typically ~4.5 mL h solvent flow into the MS, creating a stable flow microdroplets, dilutes their contents, and carries analytes to the MS. microdroplets were used to identify the characteristic ions, including fragmentation products, for each species (S1 in Supporting Information). Mass-to-charge ratios (m/z) for individual species are then tracked over time, providing a time-series of ‘droplet detection events’ (Figure S9 in the Supporting Information). Peak areas for each species are used to quantify the respective concentrations within the microdroplets; calibration curves at each pH for each species are shown in S2 in the Supporting Information. 
10 cm combined with 500 cm and N was equilibrated with the ozone generator off, which provided a humidified gas flow of up to 8 ppm O ozone (O blocked from entering the OPSI except for ~4 s during droplet ejection events, and no indications of gas-phase chemistry within the ESI were observed. 
Reference spectra of thiosulfate, sulfate, sulfite, tetrathionate, and trithionate in unreacted 
The droplet chamber environment was controlled by a humidified mixture of O, O, and N. min of oxygen was supplied to a corona discharge ozone generator and the resulting mixture was diluted into 2.5-5 L min of nitrogen. 50 cm min of the diluted flow was 
) was introduced to the QET. Before dispensing the droplets, the environmental chamber 
 in N. During reaction, droplets were exposed to a constant flow of 1-6 ppm of gas-phase ), measured by a UV ozone analyzer (2B Technologies, model 106-M). The gas flow is 
(Sigma-Aldrich, 99%), NaCl (Sigma-Aldrich, ≥99.5%), malonic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, 99%), Lglycine (≥99%), HCl (Sigma-Aldrich, 37%) and NaOH (Sigma-Aldrich, ≥98%). All droplets were dispensed from an aqueous 250 mM sodium thiosulfate (Na concentration that afforded a reasonable detection range throughout reactions. Solutions at pH 5 were buffered with 1 M malonic acid-NaOH and solutions at pH 9 were buffered with 1 M glycineHCl. Buffers were chosen for their potential environmental relevance and effective buffering ranges. Reaction R3 and the subsequent hydrolysis of SO that up to two protons may be generated for each thiosulfate molecule consumed, meaning that up to 0.5 M H pH 13 were pH-adjusted using concentrated NaOH and were unbuffered due to the lack of viable buffers in this range. Regardless, no trithionate or tetrathionate were detected during the experiments, indicating no significant change in pH. will react with ozone, are small enough that these reactions are negligible in these experiments, see S3 in Supporting Information. reaction. When the water activity of the droplets matched the relative humidity in the QET ( 0.95), the dispenser produced droplets with r = 25 ± 1 μm. The pH 9 solution required ~300 mM NaCl to lower the water activity to the desired level; no additional salt was required for the pH 5 and pH 13 solutions. Droplet sizes did not significantly change throughout the reaction. 2.3. Kinetic Modeling stochastic kinetics simulation software package, previously used by Wilson and co-workers.
Fresh solutions were prepared daily using HPLC-grade water (Sigma-Aldrich), NaSO 
The relative humidity in the QET was set to 95 ± 1% and measured at the beginning of each 
Kinetic mechanisms are benchmarked against experimental data using Kinetiscope©, a 
Kinetiscope© uses a Monte Carlo approach to simulating chemical kinetics where concentrations are propagated in time using the probabilities for each reaction step. The reaction mechanism is included as a series of discrete steps with rate constants and diffusion coefficients constrained by literature values (Table S3 in Supporting Information). Those not explicitly constrained by the literature are discussed here. When simulating reaction kinetics in microdroplets, we implement the geometric corrections developed by Willis, et al. and partitioning of solutes between the interface and the bulk (S5 in Supporting Information). Briefly, all species can adsorb to the water surface from the gas phase or from the bulk environment. Once adsorbed to the interface, species can react, desorb to the gas phase, or desorb into the bulk. The equilibrium values for the concentrations of adsorbed species are taken from literature where possible, and we employ Deep-UV Second Harmonic Generation (DUVSHG) spectroscopy to directly probe thiosulfate, sulfite, and sulfate at the air-water interface (S4 in Supporting Information). 
3. Experimental Results & Discussion phase ozone concentration using levitated microdroplets as described in methods. Representative mass spectra are shown in Figure 3. 
Ozone oxidation of thiosulfate (m/z = 113 and 135) was studied as a function of pH and gas-
Figure 3. Representative mass spectra from the ozone oxidation of a 0.25 M thiosulfate solution at (A) pH 5, (B) pH 9, and (C) pH 13. Within each panel a mass spectrum is shown that is before reaction (t = 0 min, top), during reaction (t = 5 min, middle), and after reaction (t = 20 min, bottom). Spectra are offset along the y-axis for clarity. Species relevant to reaction kinetics are labeled with the common name; see S1 in Supporting Information for reference spectra with detailed assignments of each peak and expanded reaction spectra. Colors are set to match those used in kinetics figures and reaction schemes. *indicates a buffer signal and signal. tetrathionate (S identify SO 225, and 247) as reaction products and SO demonstrating consistency with prior studies. Additionally, we identify dithionite (S as a reaction intermediate, which had not been previously detected. However, the bulk-phase experiments performed by Takizawa, et al. known/expected products, and since dithionite is relatively unstable in aqueous environments with dissolved oxygen any dithionite formed likely decomposed before it could be identified. Similarly, the droplet experiments performed by Hsu, et al. be able to distinguish dithionite from other sulfur oxyanion species. Thus, dithionite was likely present in both the bulk-phase Takizawa, et al. due to the methods used. Finally, we do not identify dithionate (expected m/z = 161 and 183) as a significant reaction product (S1 in Supporting Information). Mixed results in the literature suggest that dithionate is only a minor product, if present at all, and thus will not be included in further discussions here. 
Information) are used to asses product yields and sulfur loss (S9 in Supporting Information). The aqueous products measured here account for ~85% of the reacted sulfur at pH 5, ~60% of the reacted sulfur at pH 9, and ~65% of the reacted sulfur at pH 13. The remaining sulfur may be lost as gas-phase products (e.g., SO
Previous studies identified sulfate (SO), dithionate (SO), trithionate (SO), and 
Integrated OPSI-MS intensities converted to concentrations (S1 and S2 in Supporting 
Supporting Information). Given that we cannot directly measure gas-phase products, we use the umbrella term ‘S loss’ to discuss SO 3.1. Reaction Kinetics kinetic information for experiments with high ozone concentrations (5.39 ppm at pH 5, 4.18 ppm at pH 9 and 5.24 ppm at pH 13) are shown in Figure 4. Experiments (points) are compared with simulation results (lines), which will be discussed in Section 4. The first 20 minutes of reaction time are shown here for clarity; detailed reaction kinetics for all experiments are shown in S6 in Supporting Information. 
Figure 4. Representative detailed kinetics for the ozone oxidation of thiosulfate (S thiosulfate decay (top panels), reaction intermediates (middle panels, y-scale zoomed for clarity) and reaction products (bottom panels) for pH 5 (left), pH 9 (middle) and pH 13 (right). 
Concentration is shown in molecular units on the left y-axes and in molar units on the right y-axis. 
Reaction kinetics are obtained by analyzing a droplet every 1-2 minutes. Representative 
Experiment results are shown as points representing the average of 5 individual runs with error bars representing the standard deviation of each set. The net loss calculated via sulfur closure is shown as ‘S loss’ (orange circle) in the top panels; see S9 in Supporting Information for more details. Simulation results are shown as lines. The calculated amount of SO is shown as an orange line in the top panel for pH 5. Green points and lines represent both S and HS were not detected at a significant concentration by experiments and were not predicted to form at a significant concentration by simulations. reactant, and thiosulfate decay is first order with respect to gas-phase ozone concentration (i.e., increases linearly with ozone). This is shown by fitting the first 1-10 minutes of reaction data, shown in the top panels of Figure 4 and Figures S16-S19 in Supporting Information, with an ‘initial thiosulfate decay rate’. The calculated initial thiosulfate decay rates shown in Figure 5 increase linearly with gas-phase ozone concentration. This is consistent with previous studies, which showed that the overall reaction rate is first order with respect to aqueous thiosulfate and gasphase ozone concentrations. inversely proportional to dispensed solution pH, which has not been explicitly noted in the literature and is not readily explained by the currently accepted mechanism (e.g., R1-R3). 
Figure 5. Initial thiosulfate decay rates as a function of ozone concentration at pH 5 (red circles), pH 9 (black triangles), and pH 13 (blue squares). Experimental initial decay rates (points) are extracted from the first ~5 minutes of reaction and averaged across 5 individual runs, with error 
O as these cannot be distinguished in experiments. Species not shown for a given pH 
Several qualitative features are observed. At early reaction times, thiosulfate is the limiting bars representing the standard deviation of each set. Simulation results are shown as dashed lines extended to zero. More detailed comparisons of thiosulfate decay kinetics as a function of ozone concentration at a given pH are shown in S6 in Supporting information. represent the sum of S as we cannot distinguish protonated forms from deprotonated forms in the mass spectra used here. We can, however, make some assumptions using the known pKa values for each species. Given that the pKa for dithionite is 2.44, present at any of the pH values studied here. However, the pKa for HSO significant concentration of HSO detect it (S1 in Supporting Information). the pH values, and a significant amount of sulfite (SO known to react rapidly with ozone to form sulfate
Dithionite (S decompose in water with relatively slow reaction rates sulfate (SO at pH 5 and neither trithionate (S that the formation of trithionate and tetrathionate are pH-dependent, which is consistent with the Takizawa, et al. disproportionation reaction between tetrathionate (S pH 9 data, which shows trithionate without tetrathionate. Furthermore, we used ATR spectroscopy 
Next, we discuss reaction intermediates (middle panels of Figure 4). SO (green) points 
Regardless of exact speciation, a significant amount of dithionite (SO) is detected across 
) for available ozone, slowing down its consumption while thiosulfate is still present. 
Finally, we discuss reaction product dependance on pH. Figure 3 and Figure 4 show that 
). This could explain the presence of trithionate at pH 5 but appears inconsistent with the to measure the disproportionation rate of tetrathionate and sulfite (S8 in Supporting Information), but the measured rate did not explain the kinetic trends shown in Figure 4 when included in the kinetic model. 3.2 Proposed mechanism reaction intermediate, dithionite (S eliminating the need to assume branching ratios for R1-R3, includes a trithionate (S production pathway that does not rely on tetrathionate (S includes a multistep tetrathionate production pathway instead of the single step invoked in R1. 
Scheme 1. Proposed Mechanism for the Ozone Oxidation of Aqueous Thiosulfate (S
Species detected in the experiments presented here are bolded and the font color is set to match the colors used in mass spectrum and kinetics figures. Although we cannot directly detect SO its color is set to match that used when showing the calculated loss shown in kinetics figures. with organics, and there is increasing evidence of their presence in inorganic reactions. Specifically, an ozonide intermediate has been observed for bromide ozonation, explain the pH-dependance of iodide ozonation,
We propose a more detailed mechanism in Scheme 1, which includes the newly identified 
Nucleophile-ozone adducts, called primary ozonides, are commonly identified in reactions sulfite ozonation. an ozone-thiosulfate adduct, [O based on the work of Liu, et al. the subsequent reaction steps for thiosulfate plus ozone as: source of SO times. Thus, we propose a third decomposition pathway, discussed further in S7 of Supporting Information: experimental results. S Scheme 1. sulfate and SO dependent coupled equilibria with bisulfite (SO  SO rate constant k to form trithionate (S
Initial attempts at modeling the proposed mechanism showed that an additional pH-dependent 
Subsequent reaction steps are taken from the literature or inferred from stoichiometry and 
+ H, pK = 7.2), denoted KK. Sulfite and bisulfite can both be further oxidized, with 
However, it is unclear whether this is an elementary reaction step as two reactants with the same charge are likely to repel each other, and we observe only a weak dependance on pH for trithionate formation. Thus, we propose a similar reaction using the conjugates of HS HSO which would have a complex pH-dependence. At pH 5, there is likely a mixture of HS the acid equilibria will shift so that there is more S reaction rates, which is consistent with the trithionate (S the pH further increases to pH 13, [SO literature is written as the stoichiometric reaction step R1. as it requires a third order rate constant, which has not been measured, and does not explain pHdependent production of tetrathionate shown here. Thus, we propose: which would be affected by the pK proposed ozonide structures and the formation mechanisms for trithionate (S tetrathionate (S
 and a mixture of SO and HSO, maybe even some SO. As the pH increases to pH 9, 
To our knowledge, the only relevant tetrathionate (SO) formation mechanism in the 
The proposed mechanism in Scheme 1 can be improved by future investigations targeting the and reactions, explain the pH-dependent ozone oxidation of thiosulfate (S
4.1. Mechanism Viability reaction conditions (e.g., [O rate constants are constrained by literature values (Table S3 in Supporting Information) except experimental data presented here (S10 in Supporting Information). 
Supporting Information), and simulated initial rates of thiosulfate decay (Figure 5) all agree with experiments, especially for pH 5, pH 9, and at higher ozone concentrations. The simulated thiosulfate decay kinetics deviate slightly from experimental values for pH 13 and for pH 9 with low ozone concentrations ([O accounted for by the proposed mechanism (S9 in Supporting Information) and by decreased experimental accuracy at long reaction times. On the other hand, the simulation reproduces the shape of the dithionite (S pH values, which provides significant confidence in the proposed mechanism, where S
OPSI-MS, and attempts to record reference spectra for dithionite (S dithionite rapidly decomposes to form sulfite (SO this, the simulation and experimental results for pH 13 agree, and the pH 5 simulation calculated negligible concentrations of sulfite (SO to bisulfite does not interfere with the overall kinetic understanding. 
The proposed mechanism in Scheme 1 is incorporated into the Kinetiscope© model and 
, and , corresponding to reactions R6, R10, and R11, respectively, which are fit to the 
Simulated pH-dependent results (Figure 4), simulated ozone-dependent results (S6 in 
O have a significant role. As mentioned previously, we are unable to detect HSO using and tetrathionate (S at pH 5. Deviations for sulfate kinetics at pH 9 and pH 13 are likely due to limitations in modeling concentration of sulfate (SO of SO agreement for pH 5 and acceptable agreement for pH 9 and pH 13. The simulation also shows close agreement with experiments for the other products, trithionate (S values where these products are observed and accurately predicts negligible concentrations for each at pH values where these products are not observed. thiosulfate experiments presented here, and predicts kinetic changes due to pH, which could not be explained using the previously accepted mechanism. 4.2. Comparison with Other Experiments of thiosulfate in bulk solution oxidation of thiosulfate by bubbling mixed O aliquots every 30 minutes for analysis. The reaction was studied in a neutral pH-unadjusted solution and in alkaline solution as shown in Figure 6. 
Simulation and experimental results also show reasonable agreement for trithionate (SO), 
 evaporation and equilibria (S5.3 in Supporting Information). We find that the final 
 used here likely does not fully capture its behavior. Regardless, the simulation shows good 
). Specifically, the simulation accurately captures the kinetics and final concentration at pH 
Overall, the proposed mechanism accurately captures the kinetics of the ozone oxidation of 
We compare the proposed mechanism in Scheme 1 to literature data for the ozone oxidation 
Figure 6. Bulk kinetics for the ozone oxidation of thiosulfate (S
(C & D) solution from Takizawa, et al. and product kinetics are shown in the bottom panels. Concentration is shown in molecular units on the left y-axes and in molar units on the right y-axis. Experimental data (points) are reproduced from Takizawa, et al. alkaline conditions. The neutral solution was pH-unadjusted and the alkaline solution pH-adjusted with added NaOH equal to or greater than the amount of acid produced during reaction.
Simulation results from this work are shown as lines. parameters from Takizawa, et al. same bulk reaction steps and rates as Section 4.1 (shown as reaction steps B1-B10 in Table S3 in Supporting Information), except for the rate constants for reaction steps R10 ( buffered, and the authors note that over the course of the reaction, the pH of the ‘neutral’ solution changed dramatically, dropping to pH 1-2, which corresponds to a 5- to 6- order of magnitude decrease in [H pH is computationally expensive due to the low concentrations of H We circumvent this issue by using a steady-state assumption for [H buffered solutions but will not adequately represent kinetics in these unbuffered solutions. 
Simulation results (lines) using the proposed mechanism in Scheme 1 and experimental 
󰇜 when simulating the neutral data (Figure 6, A & B). The Takizawa, et al. solutions were not find that using  reactions R10 and R11, respectively, adequately reproduce the Takizawa, et al. (Figure 6B). To explain the difference in these effective rates, we discuss how changing pH would affect trithionate and tetrathionate production. As the pH decreases from 7 to 1, [HS increase, resulting in the higher  increase trithionate production. However, the pKa of HS aqueous SO was added in sufficient concentrations to neutralize any acidification due to reaction. the alkaline solution to be at pH 13 for simulations given the similarities in product yields between the alkaline Takizawa, et al. here (Figure 4, right column). Thus, simulations of the bulk alkaline data accurately capture reaction kinetics using the same rate constants used in Section 4.1. Despite uncontrolled pH in the Takizawa, et al. bulk kinetics using the proposed mechanism with effective rate constants, especially early times when the pH changes are small. et al. much smaller droplets (~25 μm vs. up to 4 μm). Given the enhanced role of geometry in smaller droplets, a complete analysis of the Hsu, et al. of this paper and will be included in future work exploring interfacial effects. Here, we test the simulation against one data set from Hsu, et al. experiments and model (S11 in Supporting Information). 
We thus use ‘effective’ rates for trithionate (SO) and tetrathionate (SO) production and 
 used here. In alkaline solution (Figure 6, C & D), the pH likely does not significantly change, as NaOH 
Finally, we compare our proposed mechanism with the trapped droplet experiments from Hsu, Compared with our experiments, Hsu, et al. study the ozone oxidation of thiosulfate in 
4.3. Model Insights is heavily modulated by tetrathionate production (Reaction R11 labeled with k lower pH values. Tetrathionate production is in direct competition with the acid/base equilibrium of HS the pH values studied here, resulting in overall reaction rates that favor tetrathionate production at pH 5 (Figure 4) and pH 7 (Figure 6), which affects the overall reaction stoichiometry. Specifically, simulations show that thiosulfate and ozone molecules are consumed in a 1:1 ratio at pH 9 and 13, where R11 is shut off, but in a 1.1:1 ratio at pH 5, where R11 is active. incorporating the oxygen-assisted decomposition of S observed kinetics. This means that dissolved oxygen can also modulate the ozone oxidation of thiosulfate, changing product yields. interfaces. In particular, the proposed reaction mechanism involves three species (O
Significant work has been performed to understand reaction-diffusion equilibria for ozone as a reactant, intermediates. 
5. Environmental Implications a new level of detail regarding the reaction kinetics. We directly identified an additional reaction intermediate, dithionite (S can be used to understand product speciation. Kinetic modeling of the proposed mechanism 
Kinetic modeling offers additional insights into the reaction mechanism. First, thiosulfate ) decay during ozonation is decoupled from downstream reactions at higher pH values but 
Oto SO, which has a pKa (2.44). However, [SO] is much larger than [HSO] at 
Second, anoxic SO decomposition occurs too slowly to explain the observed kinetics but 
Finally, it is worth noting that the ozone oxidation of thiosulfate may be mediated by air-water 
) that will have gas-interface-bulk diffusion equilibria coupled with their reaction kinetics. 
 but future work can focus on other gases, especially those that act as reactive 
Using OPSI-MS to probe the reaction of thiosulfate and ozone in droplets over time provided demonstrated excellent agreement with the droplet experiments presented here, literature droplet experiments, ozone oxidation of thiosulfate in both droplet and bulk phases. vary with solution pH. Namely, in both droplet and bulk phases, highly alkaline environments selectively form sulfate (Figure 4, right panel, and Figure 6D), while environments with pH ≤ 9 also form trithionate and tetrathionate (Figure 4, left and middle panels, and Figure 6B). This will be important to note when treating mining wastewater with ozone microbubbles as the final thiosalt speciation can be important for understanding environmental impacts. wastewater will be pH-adjusted prior to release into natural waters, but if any incompletely oxidized sulfur remains when the wastewater is released, it will then oxidize and acidify the receiving water. from natural or anthropogenic sources, may create atmospheric aerosols containing these same thiosalts. oxidation of thiosulfate in aerosols will create a mixture of completely oxidized sulfur (i.e., sulfate) and incompletely oxidized sulfur (i.e., trithionate and tetrathionate). The incompletely oxidized sulfur could then be deposited back into natural waters where other oxidation mechanisms would result in acidification of those receiving waters. better understand the climate effects of volcanic eruptions, stratospheric aerosols, and would have implications for SAIs designed to mimic volcanic climate effects. they could be transported far from their origin before undergoing oxidation. This delay may cause unexpected downstream natural water acidification, and thus ecological toxicity, create unexpected sulfate aerosols, which have a significant effect on climate forcing.
The data presented here and bulk data from Takizawa, et al. show that product distributions 
Breaking waves on large bodies of water like oceans and lakes that contain thiosalts, either 
 Given the predicted acidity of atmospheric aerosols, this study suggests that ozone 
Regardless of the source of thiosulfate or other thiosalts, their metastable nature means that for thiosalts in groundwaters can be challenging, not been able to directly identify thiosalts in either tropospheric or stratospheric aerosols Difficulties in distinguishing sulfur species in complex mixtures previously unidentified temporary sink for reactive sulfur in the environment, and more direct detection studies will be required to understand the full implications of the reaction mechanism presented here. 
Acknowledgements: This work was supported by the Condensed Phase and Interfacial Molecular Science Program (CPIMS), in the Chemical Sciences Geosciences and Biosciences Division of the Office of Basic Energy Sciences of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231. We thank Professor Yuan-Pin Chang for providing the data in Figure S27. 
Supporting Information: Reference Mass Spectra & Droplet Events; Calibration Curves; Ozone Reactions; DUV-SHG; Kinetic Modeling Information; Detailed Kinetics for All Experiments; Proposed Intermediate Structures; Kinetics of Tetrathionate and Sulfate Disproportionation; Product Yields and Sulfur Loss; Fitting Procedure for k