Department of Building and Environmental Technology, Lund University; Lund, 22363 
Department of Architecture and Civil Engineering, Chalmers University of 
ABSTRACT The chemical structures of dissolved organic compounds in natural waters, including degree of aromaticity, affect their physical, chemical, and biological properties and ultimately the fate of carbon in aquatic systems and during water treatment. Herein, a new fluorescence-based aromaticity index named ARIX is shown to link the composition of aquatic dissolved organic matter to its relative aromaticity across diverse aquatic systems. ARIX predicts SUVA, a widely used proxy of aromaticity, as well as the percentage of polycyclic aromatic and polyphenolic molecular formulas determined by FT-ICR MS and the ratio of “humic substances” to “building blocks” fractions determined by LC-OCD. A meta-analysis of nine datasets spanning all seven continents suggests that a single linear relationship predicts SUVA from ARIX in both bulk and extracted DOM. In impounded waterbodies exhibiting decoupling between DOC and absorbance linked to extensive biogeochemical processing, linearity can be restored by accounting for the interaction between absorbance and ARIX. The results deliver new insights on widely discussed trends in DOM optical properties and on the molecular structures underlying optical measurements in aquatic milieu. They further pave the way for new optical technologies capable of real-time predictions of DOC concentration, reactivity and fate. 
Keywords: DOM, CDOM, surface waters, reactivity, connectivity, remote sensing, sensors 
SYNOPSIS: Algorithms are presented for predicting dissolved organic carbon relative aromaticity and concentration from only spectroscopic measurements. 
1. INTRODUCTION Predicting the fate of dissolved organic matter (DOM) in aquatic systems requires the ability to detect changes in the chemical composition of DOM (1, 2). DOM consists of potentially thousands of compounds of varying age and structural complexity including those derived from the degradation of biomass as well as compounds released as by-products of metabolism or chemical processes (3). In river systems the molecular characteristics of DOM affect ecosystem health (4) and determine whether DOM will leave the water column via biological or photochemical mineralization, flocculation/precipitation or adsorption, or be transported downstream and stored in the deep sea (2, 5). 
DOM aromaticity is widely studied due to its influence on wide-ranging chemical and biological processes in water. Aromatic compounds resist degradation due to their stable conjugated π-electron systems; when combined with the continuous export of aromatic DOM from land this contributes to the overall carbon storage of aquatic systems over long timescales (1, 6). Aromatic compounds control primary production by attenuating light underwater and by binding and retaining nutrients within their molecular structures (7, 8). During drinking water treatment, large polyaromatic compounds are more susceptible to flocculation (9, 10) and compete more effectively with micropollutants for sites on adsorption filters, leading to their premature saturation (11, 12). The selective removal of polyphenolic and other compounds during water treatment further affects the abundance, types, and toxicity of disinfection byproducts formed during subsequent reactions with chlorine (13). 
DOM relative aromaticity, referring to the proportion of carbon atoms associated with aromatic bonds, is a bulk property of the pool of molecules that comprise DOM (14). Relative aromaticity determined using Carbon-13 nuclear magnetic resonance, correlated to the ratio of UV absorption at 254 nm normalized to DOC concentration, termed specific UV absorbance or commonly SUVA (14, 15). In natural waters containing low concentrations of dissolved iron, SUVA typically spans the range 1 - 6 m measuring place. However, SUVA has technical shortcomings due to requiring two different instruments (a carbon analyser and a spectrophotometer), which starkly increases measurement costs and negatively affects immediacy, accuracy and precision (16, 18). 
Fluorescence spectroscopy is widely used to study DOM composition and three fluorescence indices based on simple emission ratios are also widely used proxies of aromaticity (15): the “fluorescence index” (FI or FIX), “freshness” or “biological index” (β/α and BIX), and “humification index” HIX (19-22). However, their sensitivities to differences in aromaticity are limited (15, 16) and a theoretical basis underpinning their variability, and demonstrated links to specific DOM molecular structures, are missing (15, 23). Recently, a multispectral fluorescence index (“PARIX”) derived using parallel factor analysis (PARAFAC) was used to explain differences in treatment efficiencies among waters with different SUVA subjected to standardized water treatments (16). PARIX was defined as the ratio of two PARAFAC components, one with peak emissions above 500 nm, and the other with peak emissions around 400 nm. In treated and untreated drinking water samples from Europe, Asia and North America, PARIX predicted SUVA aromaticity more accurately than FI, HIX or BIX. 
While equations using PARAFAC ratios can be useful, it is unclear whether PARAFAC models can be generalized to other datasets or to different types of aquatic systems. Also, the requirement to perform a PARAFAC analysis has practical limitations in monitoring applications since the components are first obtained from modelling sets of multispectral data matrices, 
C-NMR aromaticity is relatively impractical, SUVA is routinely measured in its requiring many samples and relatively complicated data processing (24). By reanalyzing published datasets spanning the river to ocean continuum, the present study aimed to identify robust algorithms for predicting DOC aromaticity and abundance from in situ spectral measurements. The results provide new insights into the molecular structures underpinning optical measurements and a technical basis for monitoring DOC concentrations and aromaticity in real-time. 
2. MATERIALS AND METHODS 2.1 Datasets Nine published datasets comprising ~1000 samples were re-analysed for this study (Table S1). The datasets were created by eight independent research groups during the past two decades. They span all seven continents, include bulk DOM and extracts, with samples from inland surface waters (rivers, lakes, drinking water plants), groundwater, coastal waters, and the ocean. At minimum each dataset contains SUVA measurements plus fluorescence excitation-emission matrices (EEMs) and/or a PARAFAC model. SUVA was typically determined by the traditional USEPA method, which divides absorbance at 254 nm measured on a spectrophotometer (A by DOC concentration measured on a separate TOC analyser (18), and sometimes by sizeexclusion liquid chromatography with organic carbon detection (LC-OCD), which combines both detectors in a single instrument (25). Fluorescence intensities were measured on filtered samples in a 1-cm cell using a scanning excitation-emission (EEM) fluorometer. Absorbance was measured in a 1-cm cell within an Aqualog fluorometer or using a separate UV-vis spectrophotometer and a 1-cm or 5-cm cell. SUVA in this article is expressed in units m which is equivalent to L mg
2.2 PARIX and ARIX Two datasets (Isolates and Everglades) were used to test the generality of PARIX, the PARAFAC-based index developed for estimating percent aromaticity in bulk DOM (16). Philibert et al. (16) defined PARIX as the ratio of two components referred to as H where H represents a shorter-wavelength component with peak emissions near 400 nm. Specifically, it was tested whether PARIX derived from different PARAFAC models and different research groups predicts SUVA in bulk EEMs (Everglades) or in DOM extracts (Isolates). In both cases, the raw data consisted of PARAFAC loadings reported in published tables and PARIX was calculated as the ratio between reported Fmax values for components similar to H Isolates dataset included Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry (FT-ICR MS) performed on diverse DOM sources (17). This dataset was used to test whether PARIX predicts the relative abundance of molecular formulae associated with polycyclic aromatic and polyphenol compounds. 
Eight datasets comprising whole-water DOM samples (Alaska Rivers (26)., Australia (27), Congo (28) , Everglades (29), Horsens (30), S. America (31), SUEZ (16), Yukon Lakes (32)) were used to assess correlations between SUVA and a newly identified fluorescence ratio called ARIX. ARIX is defined as the ratio of emission intensities detected at two fixed emission wavelengths (520 nm / 390 nm) when excited by light at 320 nm. ARIX tracks the ratio of PARAFAC components identified by Philibert et al. (16) and referred to as H overlaps spectrally with several ubiquitous PARAFAC components with emission peaks between 400 - 450 nm (16, 33-35), the ARIX algorithm was designed to track PARIX using wavelengths that avoid interfering fluorescence from non-target fluorophores. 
 represents a long-wavelength component with peak emissions above 500 nm and H 
To estimate ARIX in the Isolates dataset, the fluorescence EEMs had to first be reconstructed from the reported PARAFAC model. Kellerman et al. (17) tabulated PARAFAC loadings and F values, which is sufficient information for estimating the original EEMs using published algorithms (24, 36). The reconstructed dataset doesn’t account for model residuals associated with lack of fit between the PARAFAC model and the primary dataset. Furthermore, it includes new error sources because the model loadings were reported with low machine precision. Consequently, a lower correlation is expected between SUVA and (reconstructed) ARIX than if the latter were derived from the primary EEM dataset. For the same reason, ARIX values determined for the Isolates dataset are not directly comparable to fluorescence indices reported by Kellerman et al. (17). 2.3 Regression models For each dataset, individual regression models were calculated in MATLAB (ver. 2022a) using the fitlm function to predict SUVA with model y� = β and without MATLAB’s robust statistics option that performs automatic outlier exclusion. Regressions were additionally calculated using four widely used fluorescence indices as the independent variable in place of ARIX. These were FI (“fluorescence index”), HIX (“humification index”), β/α (“freshness index”) and BIX (“biological index”). FI was calculated as the ratio of emission intensities detected at 470 and 520 nm upon excitation at 370 nm (19). HIX was calculated as the sum of emissions at 435-480 nm divided by the sum of emissions from 300–345 and 435–480 nm following excitation at 254 nm (20). BIX was calculated as the ratio of emission intensities detected at 430 and 380 nm upon excitation at 310 nm (37). β/α was calculated as the ratio of emission detected at 380 nm to the maximum emission detected at 420-
435 nm upon excitation at 310 nm (21). The algorithms for BIX and β/α produced negligible differences in regressions with SUVA so BIX alone is reported herein. 
To derive a global model linking SUVA and ARIX for all whole-waters, a model II (geometric) regression was calculated using lsqfitgm code from MBARI (38). Prior to regression analyses, outliers were excluded from three datasets: Horsens: samples with SUVA below 2 or above 8 m data point was excluded, and Yukon Lakes: one sample with extremely high DOC (>120 mg/L) was excluded. The Isolates dataset was analysed separately using ARIX derived from the reconstructed fluorescence EEMs. 
Multiple linear regressions were performed using the regress function in MATLAB with A and ARIX as independent variables and DOC the dependent variable. There was no significant main effect of ARIX in any dataset, but there was a significant main effect on A and a significant interaction between A were also significant in all datasets but Yukon Lakes. The final model for each dataset retains only the statistically significant coefficients. 2.4 Sensitivity analysis Fluorescence, absorbance, and DOC detectors have different inherent sensitivities, and instruments from different manufacturers (and even different versions of the same model) have varying levels of sensitivity and bias. A simulation was performed to estimate how much of the scatter in the relationship between ARIX and SUVA in bulk EEMs might be explained by only random (unbiased) errors. In this simulation, the model II regression equation was assumed to represent the true relationship between ARIX and SUVA. The eight bulk EEM datasets were used to generate a simulated dataset containing identical values of each DOC, SUVA and ARIX. gC and (marine) samples from the estuary were excluded; Australia: one erroneous 
Only A would align perfectly with the regression equation. Finally, a random error residual was added to each variable in each sample, selected from a random distribution defined according to Table S3. The simulation was run 100 times, then the median RMSE value across all 100 runs was recorded. 3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 3.1 Predicting DOC composition from fluorescence ratios PARIX was an unbiased predictor of the proportion of polycyclic aromatic (PA) and polyphenolic (PP) structures in DOM extracts comprising the global Isolate dataset, according to molecular formulae measured using FT-ICR MS (Fig. 1a). Data are from Table 1 in Kellerman et al. (17), representing diverse freshwater and marine samples, including samples from the Pacific ocean at 21, 240 and 674 m. PARIX is calculated as the ratio of tabulated scores for PARAFAC component C3 divided by C2. Equation 1 estimates the relative abundance of polyphenolic compounds within 5% for samples in which these formulae comprised 2 - 45% of total formulas. 
PARIX also predicted SUVA in the Isolate dataset (Fig. 1b) and in bulk EEMs from two brackish river systems in the Florida Everglades (Fig 2a). PARIX in Fig 2a is calculated from Table 2 in Timko et al. (29) as the ratio of scores for PARAFAC component C4 divided by C5, which reveals a tight correlation with SUVA spanning both river systems (R datasets demonstrate linearity between PARIX and relative aromaticity in bulk DOM and extracts, independent of the specific PARAFAC model used to calculate PARIX. 
 was allowed to vary, and it was calculated from Eq. 1 so that the simulated dataset 
Figure 1. Prediction of relative aromaticity from PARIX in the global Isolates dataset. Aromaticity was determined by A: FTICR-MS; or B: SUVA. PARIX was calculated from Table 1 in Kellerman et al. (19) as C4/C3. 
Figure 2. Prediction of SUVA from PARIX and ARIX in bulk surface waters. A: PARIX; B-F: ARIX. Samples are from inland waters and water treatment plants in Europe (EU), North America (NA), Asia (AS) and Africa (AF) (12, 29, 31-33). In A-B, D and F, each new symbol represents a different river or lake. 
In the diverse treated and untreated water samples comprising the SUEZ dataset, ARIX was an unbiased predictor of the ratio of humic substance (HS) to building block (BB) fractions determined by LC-OCD (Fig. 3, Eq. 2). While HS is understood to comprise high molecular weight humic substances, the BB fraction represents lower molecular weight weathering and oxidation products of humic substances (25). 
The relationships in Eq. 1-2 are notable considering that FTIR-MS and LC-OCD characterise all DOC fractions, including coloured and colourless molecules that do not fluoresce. Whether aromatic molecules in the DOC pool exhibit fluorescence depends on their specific structures and electronic properties. The ARIX numerator tracks a long-wavelength fluorescence component identified repeatedly in PARAFAC analyses (17, 39) and usually attributed to extensively π-conjugated polyaromatic structures (40). The denominator tracks a shortwavelength component with a secondary excitation maximum around 330 nm and emission peak below 400 nm (16, 35). This is similar to several oxidised fluorophores consisting of a single aromatic ring with attached carboxy, hydroxy, and methoxy groups, e.g. vanillic acid, syringic acid, and acetovanillone (41) albeit with longer absorption, possibly indicating additional substitution and/or the presence of a short, conjugated side chain, as in ferulic acid or coniferyl alcohol, or a conjugated heterocycle, as in coumarin (5, 41, 42). 
Figure 3. Prediction of LC-OCD composition from ARIX. Samples represent treated and untreated surface and groundwaters from the SUEZ dataset (HS: humic substances, BB: building blocks). 
3.2 Relationships between SUVA and (P)ARIX In individual datasets, ARIX and PARIX were reliable predictors of SUVA by linear regression (Figure 2, Table S2). In the Everglades dataset representing two river systems draining a tropical wetland, ARIX predicted SUVA more accurately than PARIX with RMSE = 0.21 m datasets consisting of six rivers (Fig. 2d) and fifteen hydrologically isolated lakes (Fig. 2f) in the Yukon basin, Alaska (26, 32). In the isolate dataset and in seven whole-water datasets, ARIX and/or PARIX outperformed traditional fluorescence indices when predicting SUVA. Average prediction errors (m (0.55) < FI (0.60) (Table S2 and Fig. S1-S4). Thus, although FI and HIX are the two fluorescence indices used most frequently to predict DOM aromaticity, both were poorer predictors of SUVA than ARIX and the “biological” indices. 
In Fig. 1, ARIX predicted percent aromatic molecular formulas in DOM isolates, including in extracts from 21 m and 240 m depths in the Pacific Ocean. For whole-water samples in the Horsens dataset (30) correlations between ARIX and SUVA disintegrate in the bay (Fig. 2e). Horsens river flows past relatively pristine sites in its upper reaches, then through an agriculturally impacted landscape, and ultimately past a wastewater treatment plant near the entrance to the bay. This progression is seen by decreasing SUVA and ARIX while moving downstream. Bay sites had a marine character, with high salinities (32 ppt) and low SUVA (1.62.4) as is typical for marine samples (43). In the estuary, ARIX varied randomly and independently from SUVA, indicating fluorescence intensities dropped below the limits for quantifying ARIX. gC. Low prediction errors (0.24-0.36 mgC) were also observed for two high-latitude 
Variations in water chemistry affect the prediction of relative aromaticity from fluorescence ratios. Changes in pH affect some wavelengths more than others (39, 44), which could manifest as different slope terms for datasets with different pH, or a lower coefficient of determination (R) if pH varies between samples. Fe(II) and Fe(III) cations interfere with SUVA due to light absorption by aqueous iron complexes (45), and both species as well as several other metals (e.g. Cu, Hg, Al) reduce fluorescence via quenching reactions (46). In the presence of quenching metals, non-linearities would be expected to arise between SUVA and ARIX because A increases with increasing Fe concentration, whereas ARIX will decrease due to the preferential quenching of long-wavelength fluorescence (47-49). 
Overall, the regression slope terms (β datasets, with the North American datasets having steeper slope terms than their European, Australian, and African counterparts (Table S2). Comparing regressions equations for pairs of datasets, β 0.45) or SUEZ (5.8 ± 0.36), although the latter dataset is dominated by European samples (16, 26, 32). Also, β Three datasets had lower slopes with β 0.50), Horsens (Denmark) (4.05 ± 0.19), and S. America (4.51 ± 0.58) (28, 30, 31). The Australia dataset (27) had considerable scatter and significantly lower β
3.3 Global models for predicting DOM aromaticity The SUEZ and Isolates datasets each span several continents and multiple biomes yet produced similar or higher R fluorescence measurements were performed on extracted DOM, which probably limited 
 was not statistically different in Alaska Rivers (6.36 ± 0.41) vs. Yukon Lakes (7.03 ± interfering matrix effects and improved signal/noise especially for marine DOM. However, the SUEZ dataset was measured on whole-water EEMs and still indicates a single regression for predicting SUVA from ARIX regardless of sample origin. 
Plotting all eight whole-water datasets together (Fig. 4) showed ARIX to be confined within the range 0.15-1.0, with most samples falling between 0.25 and 0.9. Except for Everglades, all datasets were reasonably well captured by a single regression equation. Eq. 3 is derived from a geometric (Model II) regression since ARIX and SUVA were measured on multiple instruments (50) and has R
Fig. 4 shows only bulk DOM datasets; the Isolate dataset was excluded due to the unavailability of original fluorescence EEMs. However, after estimating the Isolate EEMs from the published PARAFAC model (Fig. S4-6), the regression coefficients were not significantly different to Eq. 3. For the Isolates dataset, the slope was 7.77 ± 0.57 with intercept -1.15 ± 0.33, producing Eq. 4: 
Figure 4. Prediction of SUVA from ARIX in bulk DOM from global surface and groundwaters. Samples represent fresh and brackish waters (R: rivers, L: lakes, DW: treated and untreated drinking water). The orange line represents a Model II regression with R
Equations 1-4 support the hypothesis that a single slope factor links ARIX to SUVA across all DOM whole-water samples and extracts. Even the Everglades dataset shows the same slope with ARIX transposed by 0.3 units to the right. A right shift indicates a high background of colorless DOC, also seen by Everglades having an unusually large intercept in the regression of DOC vs absorbance (Section 3.4). Some of variability between datasets probably arises from artefacts; for example, the instruments used to measure ARIX and SUVA varied between datasets/regions, as did some protocols including whether samples were frozen prior to analysis. 
Inter-laboratory comparison exercises often highlight biases arising from slightly different procedures and analytical instruments, including for fluorescence spectroscopy (51), DOC and SUVA (18), and FTIR-MS (52). SUVA measured by the USEPA method is the ratio of measurements derived from a spectrophotometer and a carbon analyser, both with different inherent sensitivities and biases, making it highly susceptible to both random and systematic errors (18). In developing the USEPA standardized method for SUVA analysis, Potter and Wimsatt (18) compared SUVA measured on duplicate samples using five different commercial DOC analysers placed in the same laboratory. Despite these efforts to standardize measurement conditions, and the use of a single spectrophotometer to measure absorbance in a 10-cm cell, a high standard deviation (~0.3 m
In the current study, a sensitivity analysis indicated that ~29% of variability in Fig. 4 can be explained by purely random measurement errors under realistic assumptions about the precision of fluorescence, absorbance, and DOC detectors (Fig. S7). Furthermore, since seven different laboratories and 21 different detectors were used to derive Eq. 3, systematic biases related to different instruments and measurement protocols are unavoidable. In datasets where SUVA was measured using both the USEPA method and LC-OCD, stronger correlations were always obtained with SUVA because DOC measured by LC-OCD was perfectly estimated by DOC measured using a carbon analyzer (β R= 0.85). In two other datasets, traditional SUVA correlated only weakly to SUVA Individual datasets encompassing geographically diverse samples may provide more realistic estimates of the variability to be expected when a single set of precise detectors is used to predict SUVA from (P)ARIX across systems. For the SUEZ (whole-water) and Isolates (extract) datasets, RMSE was 0.42-0.44 m 3.4 Improving DOC predictions from absorbance measurements Aquatic systems dominated by terrestrial DOM typically show tight correlations between CDOM absorption and DOC, allowing DOC concentrations to be predicted from A numerous studies show that these parameters diverge in concert with decreasing hydrologic connectivity with the landscape (43, 53). Whereas terrestrial DOC is dominated by polyphenolic and condensed aromatic compound classes (54), in-situ production combined with the photodegradation of impounded DOM generates abundant unsaturated and phenolic molecular compounds that may come to represent a significant portion of the DOC pool (26, 55). High abundances of degraded aromatic structures result in the decoupling of A preventing the accurate prediction of DOC concentration from A extensively described and presents a significant hinder to predicting DOC concentrations from optical measurements in ecological, biogeochemical and remote-sensing studies (43). 
For all but a single dataset in this study (S. America), the correlation between DOC and A was significantly improved by adding a term to represent the interaction of A 6): 
 = R= 1, RMSE = 0.01 mgL) yet SUVA was 11% lower than SUVA(β = 0.89, 
Across the datasets, b variable contributions by colorless DOC. The coefficient b magnitude (15-120). The coefficient b 123) indicating that the effect of A was the sole exception with a small positive b had very large b 47% and 35% respectively relative to models with b indicate the potential to significantly improve DOC predictions from in situ spectroscopic measurements particularly in aquatic systems with low hydrologic connectivity, as exemplified by isolated boreal lakes (e.g. Yukon Lakes) and tropical wetlands (e.g. Everglades). 
Figure 5: Prediction of DOC concentrations from absorbance and ARIX. Top row: DOC vs A in (A) Everglades; (B) Yukon Lakes datasets. Bottom row: Measured DOC vs DOC predicted from Eq. 6 for (C) Everglades; (D) Yukon Lakes. 
Equation 6 includes two terms reflecting different CDOM components, along with an intercept representing non-coloured DOC. The first term (b fresh terrestrial CDOM and is independent of aromaticity, indicating that for the molecules comprising this pool, absorbance increases in proportion to the number of carbon atoms. The second term (b products and autochthonous DOM. This term is generally negative and decreasing with increasing aromaticity, because the conjugated polyphenolic structures represented by the ARIX numerator are more efficient at absorbing light per carbon atom than the degraded phenolic structures represented by the ARIX denominator. For terrestrially dominated ecosystems with strong hydrologic connectivity only the first term is needed to predict DOC concentration with reasonable accuracy, whereas to model optically complex waters including impounded catchments with substantial in situ biogeochemical processing, both terms are required. 3.5 Benefits for water quality monitoring Global surface waters face a changing climate with greater variability in both the quantity and quality of DOM. Warmer temperatures are increasing rates of litter decomposition in soils and rates of biological production in water at the same time as changes in land use and altered rainfall patterns are changing hydrological regimes and the connectivity between landscapes and DOM (56, 57). This affects correlations between DOC and spectroscopic measurements and decreases the accuracy of predicting DOC concentrations from absorbance measurements obtained in the laboratory or from remotely sensed imagery (58). Also due to the link between aromaticity and chemical reactivity, any lack of predictability in surface water composition negatively affects drinking water treatment by increasing the risk of chemical over- or underdosing (16). 
Algorithms developed in this study improve the prediction of DOC abundance and reactivity from spectroscopic measurements which is especially important in waterbodies with high optical complexity. New in situ spectroscopic instruments could leverage these results to deliver currently missing data and provide real-time predictions of DOC abundance, reactivity and fate. Such instruments could simplify ground-truthing of remote sensing algorithms and enhance research on carbon cycling. Further applications include drinking water treatment, whereby realtime optical data could be used to adjust chemical doses in response to changing DOC composition, facilitating the sustainable removal of DOC compounds and their associated micropollutants. 
Supporting Information. The following files are available free of charge. A pdf document containing Figs. S1 to S7 and Tables S1 to S4. 
Author Contributions: KRM designed the study, collated datasets from primary sources in cited references, performed the data analyses, and wrote the manuscript. 
Funding Sources: KRM acknowledges support from the Swedish research council Formas, grants 2022-01974 and 2023-01972. 
Competing interests: KRM is the listed inventor of Swedish patent WO2023163638 and is a board member of Valys AB. 
Data and materials availability: (Note that data and code will be made publicly available upon acceptance of this article) The data needed to reproduce these results are forthcoming in the Dryad database (https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.x69p8czt8). MATLAB code for extracting ARIX and other fluorescence indices from EEMs is available via the pickpeaks function of the drEEM software package at www.drEEM.org. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT Open science is a cornerstone of achieving rapid scientific progress as is needed to address the world’s water quality challenges. The author acknowledges the efforts of many scientists who enabled this study by making their data available for this research, especially Saman Acharya, Cristina Romera Castillo, Daniel Graeber, Sarah Johnston, Tibault Lambert, Marc Philibert, and Colin Stedmon. Colin Stedmon commented on an early version of this manuscript. 