One of the most important areas of application for equation-of-motion coupled
cluster (EOM-CC) theory is the prediction, simulation, and analysis of various types
of electronic spectra. In this work, the EOM-CC method for ionized states, known
as EOM-IP-CC, is applied to the closely lying and coupled pair of states of the
ozone cation — X̃ 2 A1 and Ã2 B2 — using highly accurate treatments including up
to the full single, double, triple, and quadruple excitations (EOM-IP-CCSDTQ).
Combined with a venerable and powerful method for calculating vibronic spectra
from the Hamiltonian produced by EOM-IP-CC calculations, the simulations yield
a spectrum that is in good agreement with the photoelectron spectrum of ozone.
Importantly, the calculations suggest that the adiabatic gap separating these two
electronic states is somewhat smaller than currently thought; an assignment of the
simulated spectrum together with the more precise band positions of the experimental measurements suggests T00 =1,368±65 cm−1 .


Amongst the brotherhood of triatomic molecules, it cannot be denied that water (H2 O) is
the most important, the most highly studied, and the most well-understood. Beyond H2 O,
many triatomic molecules that have an environmental, technological or biological impor-

tance have been subjected to many studies and are understood to various levels of detail.
Perhaps the most interesting such case is ozone (O3 ), which has a vast number of important
properties, a very rich history of study1 , and unlike the relatively simple water molecule, a
profound quantum-mechanical complexity2 . Structurally, while we think of ozone as having two distinct kinds of oxygen atoms (and an NMR experiment would reveal that), the
full molecular Hamiltonian does not distinguish between them. Rather, it yields the three
equivalent structures separated by a barrier that lies tantalizingly close to the O3 → O2 +
O dissociation threshold (102.4 kJ/mol)3 , as shown in Fig. 1. In reality, the energy levels
of ozone all have a near triple (e + a) degeneracy, albeit with a tunneling splitting so small
that it can be ignored, along with a semi-infinite lifetime (despite opposing opinion4 ). More
than a half century ago, this intriguing aspect of the ozone molecule was first discussed by
Berry5 .

Beyond the structural aspects of ozone, other mysteries surround this curious molecule.
For example, the distribution of the eighteen distinct 16 O/17 O/18 O isotopologues in the
Earth’s atmosphere differs from what is expected based on the natural isotopic abundance,

a puzzle that has been open for more than three decades6,7 .
Among quantum chemists, ozone has a notorious history, owing to its strong diradical
character causing significant difficulties in calculations of its ostensibly simple ground-state
molecular properties. An early 1989 study8,9 by the Bartlett group and collaborators found
that the CCSD+T(CCSD) method predicted that the molecular equilibrium structure of
ozone would have Cs symmetry (that is, the asymmetric stretching harmonic frequency
computed by this method is imaginary), a finding that led to a search for better treatment of
non-iterative triple excitations, ultimately leading to the well-known CCSD(T) method10–12 .
While CCSD(T) and higher-level coupled-cluster methods available today13–15 do a good job
in describing the equilibrium structure and vibrational potential, an elaborate multireference
configuration interaction calculations can describe the entire ground-state surface out to the
dissociation limit6,16,17 , facilitating calculations of spectroscopy and chemical reactions of
ozone. As such, the quantum chemical understanding and fidelity for the ground electronic
state of O3 is now at a mature level.

val = 4a1 1a2 1b1
LUMO (b1)

3 A1 2 B1 4 A

HOMO (a2)

6-31G*

1 B2 4 B1 6 A

EOMIP:
A1 A2 B1 B2
HOMO-1 (a1)

A1 12.40
A2 13.19
B2 12.48

HOMO-2 (b2)

B1 18.35

Qualitatively, the challenge posed to electronic structure theory by ozone ultimately arises
from its closely spaced highest-occupied (a2 ) and lowest-unoccupied (b1 ) molecular orbitals

(HOMO and LUMO, respectively; see Fig. 2), giving rise to the following wavefunction:
X 1 A1 = C1 [core]6 (3a1 )2 (2b2 )2 (4a1 )2 (5a1 )2 (3b2 )2 (1b1 )2 (4b2 )2 (6a1 )2 (1a2 )2 (2b1 )0 +

(1)

C2 [core]6 (3a1 )2 (2b2 )2 (4a1 )2 (5a1 )2 (3b2 )2 (1b1 )2 (4b2 )2 (6a1 )2 (1a2 )0 (2b1 )2 .

(2)

The two electron configurations [· · · ]a22 b01 and [· · · ]a02 b21 mix strongly (the coefficients of these
two leading configurations are C1 ≈0.9 and C2 ≈0.3, according to the EOM-SF-CCSD
(EOM-CCSD with spin-flip) calculations18 ), posing the aforementioned challenges with (especially single-reference) quantum-chemical methods. A second feature consequence of the
symmetry and energetic proximity of these two orbitals is that the ozone cation (which is
isoelectronic to the NO2 radical) has closely lying 2 A1 and 2 B2 electronic states derived by
ionization from the HOMO-1 and HOMO-2, respectively (see Fig. 2). Like the associated
states in NO2 , these two states are plagued by orbital symmetry breaking19 , a problem
that greatly complicates their quantum-chemical treatment. One of the many accomplishments of the Bartlett group has been their integral role in the development of equation-ofmotion coupled-cluster theory20–22 (EOM-CC, also known as linear response coupled-cluster
theory23 ). These methods provide a very efficient and simple way to treat certain classes
of electronic structure that are often termed “multireference problems”24,25 , and are ideally suited to studying reactive intermediates, radicals, diradicals, and electronically excited
states. From a somewhat wider viewpoint, the existence of closely spaced electronic states
always carries the potential for (possibly strong) vibronic coupling, a phenomenon that can
play an important role in molecular dynamics and spectroscopy. Indeed, one of the great
successes of EOM-CC methods has been in their ability — if and only if combined with
vibronic coupling models — to enable high-quality simulations of complicated electronic
spectra. Such work provides important insights into the nature of vibronic coupling in
molecular systems, as has been exemplified by various application studies (for example, see
Refs. 26 and 27). In the case of ozone cation, the two lowest electronic states separated by
a small gap of ∼0.1 eV are coupled by the asymmetric stretch of b2 symmetry (Fig. 3).
The photoelectron spectrum of ozone was reported28 in 1974. Later, much higher resolution of the positions of vibronic peaks was obtained with pulsed-field-ionization zero-kineticenergy (PFI-ZEKE) spectroscopy29 . From the theory side, the vibronic photoelectron spectrum of ozone was modeled with a vibronic Hamiltonian parameterized using multi-reference
configuration interaction method by Tarroni and Carter29 .



Symmetric stretch (a1)

Bend (a1)

Asymmetric stretch (b2)

1170 cm-1

720 cm-1

1130 cm-1

Our contribution to this issue paying homage to the career and accomplishments of R.J.
Bartlett consists of an application of a vibronic coupling model, parametrized by EOM-CC
calculations, to the photoelectron spectrum of ozone. We trust that this combination of
methodology applied to a molecule that has been extensively studied by the Bartlett group
is an appropriate contribution.

THEORETICAL MODELS AND COMPUTATIONAL DETAILS

Ozone is a C2v molecule (following Mulliken’s convention30 , the molecule is placed in the
yz-plane and the molecular symmetry axis aligns with the z-direction) with three normal
modes: symmetric stretch, symmetric bend, and asymmetric stretch (Fig. 3). The asymmetric stretch is of b2 symmetry. The two lowest electronic states of the ozone cation, 2 A1
and 2 B2 , are very close in energy—separated by the vertical gap (at the neutral’s geometry) of mere 0.123 eV (or 990 cm−1 , see Table 2)—and can be coupled by the b2 vibration,
giving rise to significant vibronic effects in the photoelectron spectrum. The vertical gap
corresponds to the difference in the energies of electronic states at the same geometry (here,
the structure of the neutral). While vertical energy gap is easy to compute, they are not
observable experimentally. The experimentally accessible value is the adiabatic gap T00 —the
energy difference between the vibronic levels of the two state.
We simulate the vibronic states of the ozone cation using the model Hamiltonian of
Köppel, Domcke, and Cederbaum—the KDC Hamiltonian31–33 . This is a multi-state and
multi-mode Hamiltonian defined in the basis of diabatic states. For the ozone cation, the
basis comprises two quasi-diabatic states (related to the 2 A1 and 2 B2 states at the minimum
of neutral ozone), coupled by one mode (asymmetric stretch, mode number 3). The model
also includes two symmetric modes (modes number 1 and 2). The matrix elements of

the vibronic Hamiltonian are expanded around the equilibrium geometry of neutral ozone
using the respective dimensionless normal coordinates, Qi , and the corresponding harmonic
frequencies, ωi . The overall form of the vibronic Hamiltonian is thus:


(1)
V
λ3 Q3
,
H = H0 1 + 
λ3 Q3 V (2)

(3a)

where H0 contains kinetic energy operator and a potential energy term for the coupling
mode
1
H0 =
2

3
X

∂2
−ωi 2
∂Qi
i=1

!

1
+ ω3 Q23 ,
2

(3b)

and V (1) and V (2) describe the two diabatic states expanded over Q1 and Q2
V (α) = E (α) +

X

i∈{1,2}

(α)

κi Qi +

X

(α)

κij Qi Qj +

i,j∈{1,2}

X

i,j,k∈{1,2}

(α)

κijk Qi Qj Qk +

X

(α)

κijkl Qi Qj Qk Ql .

i,j,k,l∈{1,2}

(3c)

Here E (α) are the vertical ionization energies calculated at the equilibrium geometry of the
neutral, κ are the coefficients of expansion of the potential along the fully symmetric coordinates, and λ is the linear diabatic coupling. Fig. 4 shows the resulting diabatic potential
energy surfaces (the corresponding contour plots are shown in the SI). The displacements
along the two symmetric normal modes are clearly visible, suggesting vibrational progressions along the bend and symmetric stretch.

We computed the parameters of the KDC Hamiltonian using ab initio CC and EOMCC methods.22,24,25,34–36 We considered methods in which the CC expansion was truncated
to singles and doubles (CCSD), singles, doubles and triples (CCSDT), as well as singles,
doubles, triples, and quadruples (CCSDTQ).15 We computed the geometry of the neutral
ozone and its harmonic frequencies and normal coordinates with CCSDT/ANO137,38 ; the
Cartesian coordinates are given in the SI.
At the optimized geometry, ozone has a bond length of 1.270 Å and a bond angle of
116.9◦ . The two symmetric normal modes have frequencies 1,170 cm−1 and 720 cm−1 , and
the asymmetric stretch has a frequency of 1,130 cm−1 .
We described the states of the cation using EOM-CC for ionization energies (known
as EOM-IP-CC).39 We used the definition of quasi-diabatic states by Ichino, Gauss, and
Stanton40 based on the EOM-IP-CC method (EOMIP-CC-QD). We computed the linear
diabatic coupling λ and the expansion coefficients κ at the equilibrium geometry of the
neutral; λ was computed with EOM-IP-CCSD-QD/ANO1. A grid of 17x17 points stretching
from −0.2 to 0.2 units along the dimensionless normal coordinates of the symmetric modes
was used to calculate the EOM-IP-CCSD/ANO1 energies that were fitted into the 4th order
polynomial in these coordinate to extract the κ parameters. The computed value of the
linear diabatic coupling constant λ is 1,394 cm−1 . The complete set of KDC parameters is
given in the SI.
We computed the vertical ionization energies at the geometry of the neutral ozone using
a composite method. The starting value is the complete basis set (CBS) extrapolation of
the EOM-IP-CCSDT/cc-pCVnZ energies with n = 5, 6.41 These values were augmented
with two corrections: the ∆Q (quadrupoles) correction in the cc-pwCVTZ basis set and the
relativistic correction calculated using EOM-IP-CCSD/cc-pwCVTZ.42 The error bars were
estimated as follows: for the extrapolated CBS reference values, we used half of the absolute
value of the difference between the best ab initio value and the extrapolated value, and for
the remaining corrections (quadruples correction, ∆Q, and the relativistic correction) we
used half of the absolute value of the correction.
To compare the simulated photoelectron spectrum to the experimental one, we used the
cross-section ratio A1 :B2 of 1:1.35.43 Additionally, the stick spectrum was broadened with

the Lorenzian envelopes normalized to the feature intensities
f (x, xi , Ii ) =

Ii
,
2
(x − xi ) + (γ/2)2

(4)

where xi is the position of the spectral peak, Ii is its intensity and γ is the peak’s width.
The spectrum was computed using the xsim module in CFOUR, with the basis of 50 harmonic states in each mode and 6,000 iterations of the Lanczos procedure, starting from the
seed vector with no vibrational excitations, i.e, |seedi = |0 . . . 0i.44 All electrons were correlated in all CC/EOM-CC calculations. All calculations were performed using CFOUR.45,46
III.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

We begin by discussing the accuracy of the computed electronic states. The vertical
ionization energy for the first excited state, E (1) , computed using the composite method
described above, is 12.827 eV. Our error estimate for this value is 30 meV (see Table 1 for
details). We note that the convergence of the vertical gap between the two states is much
faster and this value is estimated as 123±8 meV (see Table 2 for details).
TABLE 1: Vertical ionization energies with the error estimates, eV.
Contribution

2A

1

2B

2 Error estimate

EOM-CCSDT/CBS

12.872 12.981

0.02

∆Q/pwCVTZ

-0.037 -0.021

0.02

Relativistic/CCSD/pwCVTZ -0.008 -0.010

0.005

Final value, eV

0.03

12.827 12.950


Vertical gap Error estimate

EOM-CCSDT/CBS

108.8

0.9

∆Q/pwCVTZ

16.5

8

Relativistic/CCSD/pwCVTZ

-2.2

1.1

Final value, meV

123

8

Final value, cm−1

990

65

Our simulation allows for an additional element of analysis—Figure 6 shows a decomposition of the simulated spectrum from Figure 5. All lines that contribute to the spectrum
are marked individually and are color-coded indicating which electronic state’s transition
intensity the peak draws from. The total envelope of the spectrum is also decomposed
showing contributions from each state. Our simulation locates the minimum of the conical
intersection (marked as CI) at 3,174 cm−1 above the origin (12.92 eV), where origin means
the lowest energy peak appearing in the spectrum. The adiabatic energy gap between the
two lowest vibrational states in each of the cation states is T00 =1,368±65 cm−1 .
We assigned the vibronic peaks by comparing to the Franck–Condon simulation. To this
end, the spectrum is simulated once again, this time, however, setting the linear diabatic
constant to zero (λ= 0). This yields the spectra of the two electronic states at an equivalent
level of theory but without vibronic coupling, i.e., the combined Franck–Condon spectra of
the two states. Figure 7 shows this spectrum. The non-coupled spectrum is easy to assign
using the labels that mark the symmetry of the electronic state, A1 or B2 , and the vibrational
state (ν1 ν2 ν3 ), where νi is the number of quanta in mode i (i = 1 for the symmetric stretch,
i = 2 for the symmetric bend and i = 3 for the asymmetric stretch). The assigned spectrum
shows progressions in the symmetric bend. There is one such progression in each electronic
state. Additionally for each state, there is also another progression in the symmetric bend
with one excitation in the symmetric stretch.
The decomposition of the spectrum presented on Figure 6 provides additional insight. The
spectrum shows that peaks B and C are almost purely of the 2 A1 electronic and a1 vibrational
character. Starting from peak D, the contributions from two states are of equal magnitude.

It is also clear that the following peaks are mixtures of many vibronic peaks. At the energy
of about 2,000 cm−1 above the origin the density of vibronic peaks increases significantly.
This value can be compared to the minimum of the conical intersection located at about
1000 cm−1 higher in energy, at 3,174 cm−1 above the origin. Our Hamiltonian is not suitable
for describing the dissociation of the molecule, therefore, we expect a discrepancy with the
experiment as the energy gets closer to the dissociation threshold located at 4,898±3 cm−1
above the origin.29
Figure 8 shows the assigned spectrum and Table 3 lists the decomposition of all peaks
in the region of up to 3100 cm−1 . We compare the resulting assignment with the highresolution PFI-ZEKE spectrum from Ref. 29. The PFI-ZEKE spectrum is the best source
of information on the location of the peaks, especially the origin, against which the origin

2000 4000 6000
cm 1 0
D0
B C D E F CI

2000 4000 6000
cm 1 0
D0
B C D E F CI
no coupling

12.4 12.6 12.8 13.0 13.2 eV

12.4 12.6 12.8 13.0 13.2 eV

dotted line marks the energy of the minimum of the conical intersection (CI) as located by our
Hamiltonian. The right panel shows the uncoupled spectrum (the same as in Fig. 7 but formatted
in a matching manner).

peak of the simulation is aligned. The origin of the simulated spectrum is red-shifted by
170 cm−1 relative to the experimental origin at 101,020.5 cm−1 .29 This discrepancy is within
our error estimate for the vertical ionization energy (30 meV=240 cm−1 ).
The comparison with the high-resolution spectrum (Fig. 8) reveals more details. Lines
of the PFI-ZEKE experiment and our simulation match very well. Especially the states
of A1 symmetry are well aligned with the experimental features. States close to the origin
are similar to the non-coupled states. The origin peak is of A1 (0,0,0) character, the first
two excitations in the symmetric bend, A1 (0,1,0) and A1 (0,2,0) are also very similar to
the non-coupled states, whereas the higher excitations in this progression show significant
mixing. The same progression with one vibrational quanta in the symmetric stretch is more

interesting. The first of its peaks is very well aligned with experimentally visible feature,
which was previously assigned as the origin of the second electronic state. The second peak
in this series, A1 (1,1,0), has very high similarity to its uncoupled version. It is a good
candidate to assign the experimental, unassigned feature above 102,600 cm−1 .
States of B2 symmetry, on the other hand, do not align well with the experiment. The
first such peak, close to the 12.64 eV mark in Figure 8, is assigned to the A1 (0,0,1) state.
This is a vibronic state that gains intensity owing to the coupling to the electronic 2 B2
state. This vibronic peak lies in the part of the spectrum where bands of oxygen (which is
an impurity in the gas sample) are visible in the experiment. The origin of the 2 B2 state
is very similar to the uncoupled B2 (0,0,0) state, but it is located in an empty area of the
experimental spectrum. We use the difference in the energy between this peak and the origin
peak to report the adiabatic energy gap between the two cationic states, which, according
to our simulation, is T00 =1,368 cm−1 . This value is reported with an error estimate equal to
the error estimate for the vertical excitation energy gap (65 cm−1 ), which is listed Table 2.
The next peak, slightly above a 12.76 eV mark in Figure 8, corresponds to one excitation of
the symmetric bend in the 2 B2 state, but as the label on the figure shows, it is only about
55% similar to the uncoupled state.
Finally, Figure 9 compares our spectrum to an earlier accurate simulation by Tarroni
and Carter47 . This earlier work used internally contracted multi reference configuration
interaction method in a large basis set (cc-pV5Z) to thoroughly scan the vicinity of the

minima on both potentials. Similarly to our work, Tarroni and Carter did not account for
the potential at distances reaching the dissociation limit. In their work, Tarroni and Carter
used a diabatization method based on the adiabatic energies and configuration interaction
coefficients, which avoids calculation of the non adiabatic couplings.
Figure 9 includes only the lines from the earlier simulation that were tabulated with an
assignment in the article.47 The comparison shows that both match well with the experiment. Both simulations also agree in the assignment of the first progression in the bending
mode. The previous simulation, however, shows smaller spacing between the remaining lines,
yielding much higher congestion of the spectrum. Additionally, the origin of the second state
falls at lower energy (as compared to our simulation), which makes it align well with the
peak that was assigned in the PFI-ZEKE experiment also as the origin of the second state.
While an additional simulation of the line intensities would allow for the most complete
comparison to the experimental spectrum, the strong alignment of the simulated peaks of
A1 symmetry with the experimental features leads us to believe that our simulation offers
the best assignment of the photoelectron spectrum of ozone to date.


CONCLUSION

In this exploration of the photoelectron spectrum of the ozone molecule, we have deployed cutting-edge high-order CC models together with a vibronic Hamiltonian approach
to spectroscopy beyond the Born–Oppenheimer approximation31–33 . We parameterized the
Hamiltonian using EOM-IP-CC calculations and the formalism of quasi-diabatic states of
Ichino, Gauss and Stanton.40 The results of the simulation are in excellent agreement with
the experimental spectrum from the ionization onset to about 2,500 cm−1 higher (the restriction arising from the local parametrization of the Hamiltonian). Analysis of the spectrum
and its simulation underscore the importance of vibronic coupling effects in the ozone cation.
Results of this work offer a state-of-the-art insight into the details of the spectrum and allows for an assignment of the experimental results. Simulated peaks that gain intensity from
the ÃB2 state are absent in the PFI-ZEKE spectrum, which offers an interesting avenue for
further investigations.
