ESIPT-based fluorochromes are a type of promising materials for the detection of various
chemical/biological species, especially the metal cations. Herein, we elaborately designed a prototypical
ESIPT-active ɑ-naphtholphthalein- derived “turn-on” fluorogenic tweezers NPDM for selectively detecting
and visualizing Al3+ in biological and environmental samples. NPDM was found to specifically interact with
Al3+ with dual emissions, good sensitivity (50 s), large Stokes shifts (140 nm/176 nm) and low detection limit
(16.3 nM). Noteworthily, the sensing mechanism of NPDM towards Al3+ involves metal ion-coordination
induced fluorescence enhancement (CHEF), ESIPT “turn-on” effect as well as restricted intramolecular
rotation (RIR), which has been supported by Job’s plot, HRMS, 1H NMR titrations, as well as detailed DFT
calculations. Interestingly, the NPDM-Al3+ ensemble can act as a secondary chromo-fluorogenic tweezers for
monitoring F- with a low detection limit down to 34.8 nM level. Thus, an advanced molecular memory device
was constructed based on the fluorescence ‘‘off-on-off” strategy and its excellent sensing properties. Moreover,
a portable smartphone-aided intelligent platform was fabricated to realize the in-field, cost-effective, and
faithful detection of Al3+ in real environmental water samples. Significantly, NPDM was successfully
employed for imaging the intracellular Al3+ and F- ions in Hela cells without interference from the oxidative
stress and it is the first reported smart molecular tweezers capable of determining the Al3+ ions formed during

electroporation

inside

living

cells.

is valuable to develop novel practically

Furthermore,

beneficial

the

luminous

strategy

developed

here

molecules and provide intelligent

luminescent detection platform for point-of-care sensing of health-related ions species in the prospect.
Keywords: ESIPT, ɑ-naphtholphthalein-DAMN hydrazone, Chromo-fluorogenic tweezers, Al3+, Cell
imaging, Portable detection

Environmentally and/or biologically important ions species, as the notable food contaminants and
environmental pollutants, can not only destroy ecosystems but also be terribly harmful to human health.[1-5]
Among them, as the most plentiful metal element in the earth’s crust, aluminum is a non-essential trace
elements, widely exist in our daily life and adversely affect human health, and is largely applied to industrial
production, however, these industrial activities can lead to the overexposure of Al3+ to environment, followed
by excessive Al3+ accumulation in the body and plant, can damage the brain, occurring hypomnesia,
Alzheimer's disease, may also cause kidney and liver insufficiency, osteoporosis and other diseases, as well
as the abnormal growth of plant.[6-10] On the other hand, it has been treated as food contaminants to be regulated,
as the permissible limit of WHO guideline for Al3+ in drinking water is ~7.4 μM, thus it is of great
momentousness to develop an simple and efficient way to sensing the contaminants Al3+ ions in food and
environment. At present, the existing conventional tools such as inductively coupled plasma-optical emission
spectrometer/-mass

spectrometry

(ICP-OES/-MS),

atomic

absorption

spectroscopy

(AAS),

and

electrochemical method have already been used for detecting metal ions.[11-15] However, the flies in the
ointment are that these methods have the deficiencies of complex and professional operation (user-unfriendly),
poor portability, as well as high cost.[16] Nowadays, smartphone-integrated optical detection platform has
emerged as a promising method for semi-quantitative or quantitative, low-cost, convenient, real-time and
precise in-field analysis of metal ions and other targets.[17-21] Compared with naked visualization detection,
the smartphone-assisted RGB color analysis allows a higher accuracy and sensitivity mainly benefit from the
breakthrough of self- limitation of vision.[22] The above inadequacies would be addressed due to the fact that
such a new strategy incorporating smartphone with optical probes can be easily expanded as a hand-held
contaminant detector without the need of expensive and bulky instruments in the foreseeable future. Thus, it
is meaningful and urgently needed to develop a portable, visualized, point-of-care (POC), accurate and handy
optical analysis platform for Al3+ and other analytes detection in further research, especially in resourcelimited environments.
Fluorogenic probe presents the benefits of methodological simplicity, brief reaction time, high sensitivity,
low LOD, cost-efficiency, accuracy, and capability of noninvasive fluorescence imaging in biological systems

as compared with the conventional sensing protocols for specific metal ions.[23-33] Thus far, there has been a
striking

progress

in

fluorogenic

probes

for

the

sensing

of Al3+

and

other metal

ions

based on various sensing mechanisms.[34,35] The response mechanisms utilized for fluorogenic probe design
generally involve the following: AIE (aggregation-induced emission),[36-38] ESIPT (excited state
intramolecular proton transfer),[39-42] PET (photoinduced electron transfer),[43,44] ICT (intramolecular charge
transfer),[45,46] CHEF (chelation-enhanced fluorescence),[47,48] FRET (fluorescence resonance energy
transfer),[49,50] CL (chemiluminescence),[51-53] TBET (through bond energy transfer),[54,55] and TICT (twisting
intramolecular charge transfer),[56] etc. Amongst them, ESIPT-active fluorogenic probes have gained
considerable attention because they offer promising superiorities, such as large Stoke shift, strong brightness,
high sensitivity and outstanding photostability. The existing researches demonstrate that the intramolecular Hbonding between H acceptor (=N- and C=O) and H donor (-OH and NH2) groups is ordinarily essential for
the ESIPT molecules. The most commonly used ESIPT fluorogenic building blocks including the typical
backbones

of

SSB

(salicylaldehyde-based

Schiff-base),

flavones,

benzophenones

and

HPQ

(hydroxyphenylquinazolinone), and the analogues of HBT (2-(2'-hydroxyphenyl)benzothiazole), HBI (2-(2'hydroxyphenyl)benzimidazole) and HBO (2-(2'-hydroxyphenyl)benzoxazole), and so on.[57] Generally, ESIPT
is a distinctive four-level phototautomerization process (Enol-Enol∗-Keto∗-Keto). More specifically, in the S0
state, the molecules typically existing as an E form with the intramolecular H-bond, i.e., O─H⋅⋅⋅N, O─H⋅⋅
⋅O, and N─H⋅⋅⋅N.[58] Upon photoexcitation to the E* form, proton transfer takes place from H donor to H
acceptor to generate the K* form with the change of intramolecular H-bond (O⋅⋅⋅H─N, O⋅⋅⋅H─O, and N⋅
⋅⋅H─N). The K* form can decaying radiatively return to the K form and then a RPT (reverse proton transfer)
occurs to produce the original E form. According to the energy barrier difference of ESIPT, single-emission
from E* form or dual emission from E* form and K* form can be experimentally observed. Thanks to this
extremely fast photochemical process, ESIPT molecules are featured by some particularly charming traits that
make them valuable for fluorogenic probes, bioimaging agents and OLEDs, etc.[59-62] In recent years, SSBderivated ESIPT fluorophores have been popularly used for designing the fluorogenic probes for ions (metal
cations and anions), small molecules, biomolecules, and chemicals and others because of their easy access to
synthesize and modify as well as the excellent photophysical properties.[63-69] For example, Luxami et al.
proposed that the ‘‘turn-on’’ fluorogenic probe for Al3+ can be constructed by ESIPT and AIEE mechanisms.[70]
Murugesapandian et al. synthesized an all-in-one type ESIPT-active multi-stimuli responsive fluorescence
probe with AIE feature.[71] Intriguingly, a kind of novel keto-salicylaldehyde azines as building blocks of
AIEgens were synthesized recently by Tang et al.[72] Yoon et al. and Zhou et al. designed the ESIPT and AIE
fluorogenic probes for biothiols based on salicylaldazine dyes.[73,74] To date, numerous ESIPT-active Schiffbase fluorogenic probes were developed for Al3+ detection.[75-90] Nevertheless, among them, only a few can

consistently maintain the ESIPT feature, and the design strategies are still very scarce.[91-94] Therefore, it is
still urgently demanded novel fluorogenic probes with continuous ESIPT characteristic for Al3+ ions and other
targets estimation overcoming these limitations.
In the light of the previous reports diaminomaleonitrile (DAMN)-based Schiff-base fluorogenic probes are
fascinating due to their unique multiple reactive sites, especially the seductive binding features.[95-104] Recently,
Zheng Li et al. have developed a DAMN-based dual channel emissive fluorogenic probe for the selective
detection of Al3+.[105] Additionally, this group have again reported a dual-response fluorogenic probe for Al3+
and Zn2+ based on a DAMN-benzothiazole hybrid.[106] Subsequently, Yun Wang and co-workers have
constructed a new DAMN-based colorimetric and ratiometric fluorescence probe for highly selective monitor
of Al3+and ClO-.[107] Unfortunately, so far only few DAMN-derived Schiff-base fluorogenic tweezers with
continuous ESIPT property for Al3+ sensing that have been reported.[91,92] Hence the development of available
ESIPT-active DAMN-derived fluorogenic tweezers for Al3+, especially in biological systems, is still in its
infancy. As well known, the imino-based molecules has weak fluorescence in either room temperature (RT)
solution or solid state, which is ascribed to easier intramolecular motions via the double-bond torsion-causing
photoinduced nonadiabatic decay (PIND) effect.[108] Such PIND-guided ESIPT molecules possess the
remarkable potential to act as the advanced versatile fluorogenic probes. Inspired by this notion and to address
the above concerns, in this work, the bistructure molecular tweezers NPDM with ESIPT property was
developed successfully by using an ɑ-naphtholphthalein-donor and dual DAMN acceptors bridged by two
iminodouble bonds. Indeed, NPDM can specifically sensing Al3+ over other miscellaneous metal ions with
significant “turn-on” dual emissions fluorescence features in aqueous DMSO mixture (Scheme 1).
Impressively, apart from the HRMS and 1H NMR methods, (TD)DFT calculations were also performed to
further corroborate the binding mode and elucidate the Al3+/F--switched ESIPT process theoretically and
clarify the experimental results. By utilizing the two chemical inputs (Al3+/F-) and dual emission outputs, a
molecular memory device was established. More intriguingly, the portable, semiquantitative, precise,
visualized, and on-site sensing of Al3+ ions in water samples was achieved by a smartphone-based intelligent
detection platform. What's more, NPDM was successfully employed for sensing the various concentrations
of Al3+ and F- in live HeLa cells with desirable biocompatibility and without interference from the intracellular
oxidative stress. This study would lay the foundation for ESIPT-active fluorogenic tweezers with multiple
functions in practical applications.

2. Results and discussion
2.1 Synthesis
The fluorogenic tweezers NPDM was designed and easily obtained in two steps (Scheme S1). The
intermediate NS was synthesized by the Duff reaction according to the previous work;[109] after that the NPDM
was successfully synthesized via the Schiff-base condensation reaction between the NS and DAMN, which
was also characterized using 1H NMR, 13C NMR, and HRMS (high-resolution mass spectrometry) (Fig. S1S5, ESI).
2.2 Theoretical studies on the ESIPT effect of NPDM
We applied (TD)DFT calculations for systematical comprehension of the ESIPT effect in NPDM (Fig.
1). The molecular electrostatic potential (MEP) reveals the dispersions of electron density on the molecular
surface, is an extremely useful tool for understanding of the H-bonding interaction.[110] So first, the
electrostatic potential (ESP) surface of NPDM was calculated to disclose the activity of the hydrogen bond
O−H···N. As shown in Fig. 1A, the electrostatic potentials of DAMN moieties were smaller than that of
naphthols, indicating the accumulation of negative charges on the DAMN sites. Besides, the positive potentials
of OH groups (H-bond donors) and the negative potentials of N atoms of the -C=N groups (H-bond acceptors)
proving the existence of hydrogen bonds in NPDM. Additionally, the frontier molecular orbitals (FMOs)
analysis was presented to further certify the existence of the ESIPT phenomenon. Although the electronic
distributions over the ESIPT-generated K* form were closely resemble those of E* form, but the
transformation from E* to K* form caused a lower energy gap between the HOMO and LUMO by 0.0781 eV
(Fig. 1B). Thus, the diminished energy gap was precisely corresponding to the red-shift of emission maximum
for K* form of NPDM. In addition, the IR vibrational spectra were simulated to analyse the variations of Hbonds strength of O-H groups (Fig. 1C). The comparative observation specified that the IR vibration frequency
of O-H in the S1 state showed a significant red shift of 326 cm-1 (from 3188 cm-1 to 2862 cm-1), endorsing the
the change in the geometric parameter of intramolecular H-bondings and enhancement phenomenon of Hbonds in the S1 state, and implying the happening of ESIPT effect is more favorable.[111] Furthermore, in order
to explore the inherent mechanism of the ESIPT effect, the 2D potential energy curves (PECs) of NPDM at
the S0(E) and S1(E*) states were scanned separately according to the optimized structures (Fig. 1D). The

obtained PECs of NPDM are as the functions of O-H distance ranging from 0.9972 Å(initial length) to 2.3572
Å and 1.0072 Å(initial length) to 2.2872 Å at its S0 and S1 states respectively. As plotted in Fig. 1D, the
forward energy barrier of 3.15 kcal/mol is higher than the reverse energy barrier (0.18 kcal/mol), manifesting
that it is of difficulty to occur the proton transfer reaction at the S0 state.[112] By contrast, there is almost no
energy barrier in the S1 state proton transfer. Hence, this is more favorable for the ESIPT process to proceed.

2.3 The optical properties of NPDM for reversible detection of Al3+
Primarily, colorimetric properties of NPDM towards Al3+ ions were investigated in aqueous DMSO solution
(Fig. S6, ESI). The characteristic short-wavelength absorption bands (329 nm, 357 nm), and the longer
absorption bands (414 nm, 473 nm and 502 nm) in UV-Vis spectrum of NPDM (10 µM) were due to π → π*
transitions and charge transfers (CT) from the electron donors ((D, phenolic hydroxyl) to the acceptors (A,
cyanogen) groups respectively.[113-115] Upon addition of Al3+ ions (20 µM), significant variations of absorption
pattern were marked. The typical absorption band at 414 nm was bathochromic-shifted to 436 nm, and the

absorption maximum near 473 nm and 502 nm were enhanced along with a color change from yellowish
brown to chrome yellow, which indicated that NPDM could coordinate with Al3+ ions. The above observations
illustrated that NPDM can undergo a chromogenic response to Al3+ ions. In addition, the intrinsic optical
properties of NPDM are very important. So, its emission spectrum was tested under the excitation of 380 nm
in DMSO, and the emission maximum is observed around 547 nm (Fig. S7, ESI). The dual emissions could
be attributed to ESIPT behavior of molecular tweezers NPDM.

Then, we tested the fluorogenic responses of NPDM in the presence of Al3+ (100 µM) and other competitive

metallic ions (i.e, Li+, Na+, Ag+, Zn2+, Mg2+, Ca2+, Co2+, Fe3+, Fe2+, Ni2+, Sn2+, Cd2+, Pb2+, Mn2+, VO2+, Cu2+,
Hg2+, 200 µM) in DMSO/H2O (7/3, v/v, 10 mM, HEPES, pH 7.0). As shown in Fig. 2A, NPDM alone has the
faint fluorescence owing to C=N isomerizations and PET behaviors as well as the existence of strong electron
withdrawing groups (-C≡N) in NPDM.[116,117] By contrast, as Al3+ was added to NPDM solution, a significant
dual emission bands at 520 nm and 556 nm were observed, which may be the results of ESIPT processes,
whereas there were no remarkable fluorescence variations of NPDM when other miscellaneous cations were
introduced into NPDM solution respectively. The relative fluorescence intensity increased by 35 folds as
compared with that of free NPDM (Fig. 2B). Further, the tolerance experiments were explored in the presence
of competitive cations (Fig. S8, ESI). It showed that only Cu2+ obviously reduced the maximum emission
intensities, however, this interference can be cleared up with the masking reagent dimethylglyoxime (DMG)
for the distinction between Al3+ and other metallic ions.[118] These results implied that NPDM is highly
selective to Al3+. Furthermore, the fluorescence titration experiments were employed for investigating the
interaction properties of NPDM towards Al3+. As shown in Fig. 2C, fluorescence intensities of NPDM
solution at 520 nm and 556 nm showed the linear growth up to 100 µM Al3+ and reached the equilibrium (200
µM) following the visual fluorescence change from colorless to strong green-yellow under a 365 nm UV lamp
(Fig. 2C inset). The fluorescence enhancement of NPDM treated with Al3+ could be atrributed to the CHEF
and ICT processes.[119] NPDM-Al3+ (Φ = 0.3404) complex implied about 37 folds higher Φ value than that of
NPDM solution (Φ = 0.0096) at 520 nm. It’s noteworthy that the appearance of remarkable dual emission
bands at 520 nm and 556 nm with the introduction of Al3+ are contributed to coexistence of the forms (enol
and keto) in phenolic Schiff base moieties and may be due to the excited tautomer of E* and K* forms arising
because of ESIPT processes (Scheme 1). The emission bands at 520 nm and 556 belong to NPDM-Al3+ enol
form and NPDM-Al3+ keto form respectively. Actually, if the chealation of NPDM with Al3+ trigger
deprotonations of the phenolic hydroxyl groups (-OH), the ESIPT processes would not happen and NPDMAl3+ complex only could emit a single emission band.39,57 However, the deprotonation behaviours could not
be observed, and thus ESIPT is not blocked and the dual emissions arising, which was also further supported
by HRMS, 1H NMR, and DFT studies. By plotting the relative emission intensities (I/I0) at 520 nm versus the
[Al3+] (Fig. 2D), and according to the DL equation (3δ/slope), the LOD of NPDM for Al3+ was found as 16.3
nM (0-40 μM, R2 = 0.9975), which is sufficiently below the maximum allowable level of Al3+ in potable water
from the EPA (7.4 μM), revealing desirable sensitivity of NPDM for Al3+ ions. The stoichiometric ratio of
NPDM chelated with Al3+ was obtained as 1:2 using Job’s plot (Fig. S9, ESI). Depending on fluorescence
titration data, the association constant between the NPDM and Al3+ was estimated to be 1.07 × 1010 M-2 by
the Benesi-Hildebrand plot (Fig. S10, ESI), which displayed the binding affinity of NPDM to Al3+ was enough
strong.

In addition, the time-dependent fluorescence response of tweezers NPDM (10 μM) for Al3+ was conducted in
DMSO/H2O (7/3, v/v, 10 mM, HEPES, pH 7.0) solution. As shown in Fig. 2E, after the introduction of Al3+
(20 µM, 100 µM) to NPDM solution respectively, the relative fluorescence intensity (at 520 nm) of NPDM
quickly reached the equilibrium within 1min. Thus, the above results clearly proved that NPDM has great
potential for the quick and real-time monitoring of Al3+. To evaluate the practical application potential of
NPDM in live organisms, the pH effect on the NPDM response to Al3+ was examined subsequently over the
pH range of 4 to 11. (Fig. S11, ESI). In case of NPDM alone fluorescence intensity alterations are negligible
at pH 4-11, whereas the NPDM-Al3+ complex exhibited noticeable fluorescence enhancement, especially at
pH 6-8, suggesting the practical application potential for sensing Al3+ under physiological conditions. Finally,
comparing with the recently reported Schiff-base-based fluorogenic probes for selectively sensing Al3+ which
have similar conformations, NPDM manifests the superiorities in desirable sensitivity, satisfactory LOD, large
Stokes shifts, rapid response, interaction mechanism, and broad preliminary applicable potentials (Table S1,
ESI).
Repeatability is one of the crucial standard for most molecular probes and it is considered generally as the
competence of the fluorescence probes designed to display uniform performances and give comparable
sensitivity attributes when the molecular probes or mode are repeatedly used.[120] Thus, to qualitatively
investigate the reversible sensing process of Al3+ by NPDM, we add no less than seventeen sorts of
physiological and environmental-related anions: F-, Cl-, Br-, I-, AcO-, S2O32-, NO3-, NO2-, CO32-, S2-, SO42-,
SO32-, H2PO4-, H2PO2-, HPO42-, PO43-, and P2O74- (PPi) into NPDM-Al3+ system (DMSO/H2O, 7/3, v/v, 10
mM, HEPES, pH 7.0), respectively. As shown in Fig. 2F, upon interaction with interfering anions NPDMAl3+ adduct showed negligible changes in fluorescence intensity, except that F- (40 μM) caused reliable
fluorescence quenching. Additionally, the fluorescence “ON-OFF” switching feature of NPDM-Al3+
ensemble is further verified by fluorescence titration experiments (Fig. 2G). With the progressive addition of
F- (0-40 μM), the emission intensities of NPDM-Al3+ at 520 nm & 556 nm were gradually declined and
reached saturation state when 4 equiv. of F- was added and up to 95% emission intensity of the complex system
was quenched. The LOD for F- was estimated to be 34.8 nM, which is not only superior to some previous
secondary molecular tweezers for detecting F-, but also well below the recommended dosage (79 μM) by
WHO for potable water. Thus, the results suggested that fluorescence tweezers NPDM was reinstated during
the sensing procedure of F-. Moreover, to further corroborate the stability and reproducibility of the NPDMAl3+ complex, we conduct F--addition experiments. As shown in Fig. 2H, the periodically alternating
introduction of given amount of Al3+ and F- to the solution of NPDM led to a switchable alteration in the
fluorescence spectrum. Interestingly enough, such ‘off-on-off’ fluorescence switching cycles could be
repeated at least four times without compromising its sensitivity by modulating the addition of Al3+/F- (Fig.

2I) and this phenomenon manifests that NPDM alone has no direct response to the anions. Therefore, F- anions
binded to Al3+ ions through decomplexating Al3+ from the NPDM-Al3+ whole. Thus, assisted by F- anions, the
repeatability in case of Al3+ ions could be achieved. Nevertheless, these negative changes could be
countervailable when the Al3+ concentration is in excess along with the corresponding fluorescence color
variations under a UV-lamp ( Fig. 2I inset). All the experimental data demonstrated that NPDM is an
recyclable “off-on-off” molecular tweezers for Al3+ and F-.
2.4 Proposed Mechanism
To better expound the sensing mechanism, HRMS, 1H NMR and DFT calculations were studied. Upon
addition of 1.0 equivalent of Al3+ into NPDM, the newly found unique ion peak at m/z = 749.08154
corresponding to [[NPDM + Al3+] + 2Cl - H]- (calcd. [[NPDM + Al3+] + 2Cl], m/z: 750.08780) (Fig. S12, ESI),
which indicated that NPDM chelated with Al3+ to form the NPDM-Al3+ complex with 1:1 stoichiometry.
Similarly, when the 2.0 equivalent of Al3+ was introduced into the solution, the existing molecular ion peak at
m/z = 654.1764 (bare NPDM) disappeared to be replaced by a new ion peak at m/z = 776.10046 (negative
mode) (Fig. S13, ESI), which can be assigned to [[NPDM + 2Al3+] + 4H2O - 2H]- (calcd. [[NPDM + 2Al3+]
+ 4H2O], m/z: 778.16609), further confirming the generation of NPDM-Al3+ whole with 1:2 stoichiometry,
which is consisted with the Job’s plot analysis. What's more, the 1H NMR titration was also recorded in DMSO
‑d6 to better understand the detailed interaction of NPDM with Al3+. As provided in Fig. S14, with the addition
of 2.0 equivalent of Al3+, the proton H (phenolic-OH) at δ 12.26 ppm downfield shifted to 12.48 whereas the
proton H (free -NH2) at δ 7.40 ppm disappeared, meanwhile, a new peak (-NH) was formed at δ 9.38 ppm,
which is caused by interaction between -NH2 and Al3+. In addition, the imine proton (8.57 ppm, HC=N) slightly
upfield shifted to δ 8.51 ppm. Thus, the protonation state of the PhOH enables the ESIPT process remain
unchanged in NPDM-Al3+ adduct. The above findings supported that the proposed mechanism of NPDM for
Al3+ can be illustrated in Scheme 1.
It is envisaged that the dynamic intramolecular motions and relevant vibronic coupling in RT solution could
hamper ESIPT.[121] Therefore, to decipher the fluorescence mechanism in RT solution, the PESs of the
rotational C=N bond/C=C bond in the enol and keto form respectively in the S 1 states were firstly calculated
by scanning the torsion angle (0o →180o) at 10o intervals (Fig. 3A-B). Theoretically, the conical intersection
(CI) is one of nonradiative pathways and is detrimental to strong light emission with high quantum yield. In
addition, the dwindling energy gaps between S1 and S0//S1 (the vertical projected S0 state) can cause an
elevated rate of IC (internal conversion) and ultrafast nonradiative decay in terms of the energy-gap law.[122]
As described by the excitation state double-bond rotations-guided PESs (potential energy surfaces), twisting
around the imino/vinyl-double bond can yield the CI at the 90o torsional angle. These imply that the excited
NPDM molecule can be efficiently inactivated to S0//S1 state via the CI pathway of nonradiative IC, after that

the vibrational relaxations to their original S0 states or isomers.108 The total de-excited processes are defined
as PIND. It is noteworthy that the excited NPDM molecule (E* and K*) exhibits the double bond twisting
behaviors, resulting in the vain overlap of molecular orbitals with f = 0 in the emissive transitions, which
caused that the NPDM molecule has almost no fluorescence in RT solution. Thus, the rotations of doublebond could explain the special emission behaviors of the tweezers NPDM. Obviously, the weak emissions of
NPDM in aqueous DMSO were mainly owing to the ease of C=N bond/C=C bond rotation in the S 1 states.
When configurational change between E* and K* forms occurred, the CI would be clearly found in the PES
plots. NPDM alone shows negligible emissions in aqueous DMSO solution, however, NPDM-Al3+ complex

shows dramatic fluorescence enhancement because the double bond twisting behaviors within the molecules
were blocked and the C=N isomerization is limited.[123] Briefly, the exciton could be released dominantly
through radiative decay resulting in the strong fluorescence emissions. These explained why the emissions of
NPDM alone were much weaker in aqueous DMSO.
To strengthen the interaction mechanism, the optimized geometries and the HOMO/LUMO orbital energies
of NPDM, and NPDM-Al3+ (enol-keto forms) were again computed using (TD)DFT calculations through
Gaussian 09[124] (Fig. 3C, Fig. S15). The energy gaps of NPDM, and NPDM-Al3+ in the S0 states were
examined as 3.0047 eV, and 2.7524 eV respectively. The data show that the binding of Al3+ to NPDM
narrowers the energy gap and stabilizes the system, also confirming the red-shift of NPDM-Al3+ in the
absorption maxima, which coincides well with the aforementioned absorption spectra analysis. Additionally,
the energy gaps of NPDM-Al3+ complex (E*) and NPDM-Al3+ complex (K*) were determined to be 2.1598
eV and 2.0074 eV, respectively. These calculations demonstrated that the energy gaps in the NPDM-Al3+
complexes (E*- K* forms) were quite lower than that of NPDM, verifying the enhancement of ICT effect.
Furthermore, the energy gap of NPDM-Al3+ complex (E*) was larger than that of NPDM-Al3+ complex (K*),
which could be responsible for dual emissions of NPDM-Al3+ because of ESIPT process.
In addition, the TD-DFT calculations were also performed to describe the specific ESIPT luminescence
mechanism observed above (Fig. 3D, Table S2 ESI). The computational vertical excitation energy in the S0(E)
→ S1(E*) process is 2.8764 eV (431 nm), approximate to the absorption peak value of NPDM-Al3+ in solution
(436 nm). The vertical emission energy in the S1(K*) → S0(K) was calculated as 2.4311 eV (510 nm),
approximating the emission peak value of NPDM-Al3+ in keto form (556 nm). There is not a local minimum
for S0(K), hence NPDM-Al3+ returns to S0(E) without energy barrier (Fig. 3D).[125] With the aid of the
theoretical calculations, the photophysical process of NPDM-Al3+ has been elucidated (Fig. 3D). In the
electronic S0 state, NPDM-Al3+ exists solely as a S0(E) form like other quintessential ESIPT molecules for
the steady intramolecular H-bonds. Upon photoexitation, S1(E*) was transformed into tautomer S1(K*)
through an ultrafast ESIPT process,[126] which caused the transient change of the electronic characteristics and
simultaneously the formation of a new S1 state PES.[127] After decaying radiatively to S0(K), followed by
reverse proton transfer process happened to the original S0(E) form, eventually finishing the ESIPT photocycle.
The above studies were better enough to understand the ESIPT mechanism of tweezers NPDM towards Al3+.
Generally, the thermodynamic parameters can assess the rationality of numerous chemical reaction
pathways. Thus, the free energies of the transformation systems were calculated at the B3LYP/6-31G(d,p)
level in DMSO-H2O, using the IEFPCM model.[128] The results revealed that the Gibbs free energy of
NPDM(K) is 0.1 kcal/mol higher than that of the NPDM(E) (Fig. 3E), proving that this transfer process is an
exothermic reaction, which is thermodynamically favorable from the NPDM(K) to NPDM(E). In further

investigation of the luminous mechanism, the ESP maps were performed to interpret the charge distribution
difference between NPDM-Al3+(E) and NPDM-Al3+(K). As shown in Fig. 3F, the ESP values of NPDMAl3+(E) and NPDM-Al3+(K) are positive across the whole molecular scaffolds, demonstrating the inhibition
of PET effect in NPDM-Al3+, which are consistent with the above spectral analysis. These results consolidated
our proposed response mechanism (Scheme 1).
2.5 Molecular memory device

Molecular logic gate is an interdisciplinary research field, and many efforts have been made to design
molecular memory device in recent years.[129,130] Sequential logic circuits are significant for the making of
molecular memory devices to store data and execute logic gate operation via feedback loops, in which one of
the outputs functions as an input of the memory device and is memorized as a ‘memory element’.[131] Inspired
by the above observations, we designed a sequential logic circuit that displayed a ‘Reading-Writing-ErasingReading’ property assisted by a binary logic function (Fig. 4). In the concrete system, we chose dual strong
fluorescence outputs at 520 and 556 nm as the ‘ON’ state (Output = 1) and two quenched emission outputs as
the ‘OFF’ state (Output = 0). Here, the two chemical inputs, namely Al3+ (1) and F- (2), were chosed for the
Set (S) and Reset (R) processes, respectively, and their existance is considered as “1” and the absence is
designated as “0”. The operation of this memory function is as follows:[132,133] when the S input is a dual high
emission values (S = 1), the system writes and then memorizes the binary state “1”. By using R input (R=1),
the stored data is erased, and then the binary state “0” will be memorized with the dual emissions quenching
dramatically. Fig. 4A depicts the bistable behavior, ‘OFF-ON’ state, of the tweezers NPDM and discloses the
non-volatile feature of the “memory effect”. The behavior can be popularly used in microprocessors for
memory cells of integrated logic circuits.[134,135] As described in Fig. 4B, this type of repeatable and
reconfigurable sequences of S/R logic operations can be embodied in the shape of a feedback loop, which
manifests a memory nature akin to ‘Reading-Writing-Erasing-Reading’ functions. It is noteworthy that the
logic device as presented here demonstrates its large advantages over early developed related systems, at least
in relation to the reversibility and reproducibility as well as the great potentials for successive determination

of common metal ions and anions (F-).

The above results enunciated the eminent sensing performance of NPDM towards Al3+ in solution, then
again, the MTT assay showed that NPDM has very low cytotoxicity even at high concentrations (Fig. S16,
ESI). In view of the redox-active Schiff-base-based fluorogenic probes can easily suffer from oxygenolysis
which was induced by reactive oxygen species (ROS) and reactive nitrogen species (RNS), such as OCl-,
ONOO-, and H2O2, which are three primary ROS and RNS in live cells, and evidence also suggests that OCland ONOO- can affect the fluorescence changes by oxidizing the C=N moiety of DAMN-based Schiff-base
luminophores,[107,136,137] the chemical stability of NPDM for Al3+ detection in living cells was also investigated
by evaluating the resistance to endogenous OCl- and ONOO-. As shown in Fig. 5A, when the cells were treated
with NPDM alone, there was almost none fluorescence signal. Then, lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and PMA were
used to stimulate cells produce endogenous ONOO- and OCl-. However, no fluorescence signal was observed
in the green channel but the cells showed ignorable fluorescence signal in the blue channel when the cells
were pretreated with LPS and PMA for 4 h, and then stained with NPDM for 0.5 h (Fig. 5B). Next, the cells
further cultured with Al3+ showed obvious green fluorescence (Fig. 5C), indicating the excellent chemical
stability of NPDM in living cells. All the results clearly manifested that NPDM is capable of long-term tracing
Al3+ without interferences by active substances in living cells.
With these results in hand, we further checked the traceability of NPDM to monitor Al3+ in live HeLa cells


To further verify the recyclability of NPDM in living biosamples, another fluorescence-imaging
experiments were carried in HeLa cells (Fig. 6B). As the cells were treated with only NPDM, there were no
any fluorescence signal in the green channel. When HeLa cells were further treated with 2 equivalent Al3+, the
bright green fluorescence was observed. Furthermore, addition of the 4 equivalent F- quenched the green
fluorescence. Attractively, followed by addition of the excessive Al3+ (appr. 80 μM) restored the intense green
fluorescence (Fig. 6E). The alterations of intracellular fluorescence was in good accordance with the

phenomena in solution. The above phenomena showed that tweezers NPDM can act as a reliable tool to
sequentially monitor Al3+ and F- level in live cells, revealing reversible imaging property of tweezers NPDM
in living cells.
In traditional cell electroporation experiments, we often use aluminum electrodes, but which can lead to
leaking of Al3+ ions, causing cells damage. Taking this into account, we try to employ tweezers NPDM in
detecting the Al3+ formed during the electric shock process. As shown in Fig. 6C, before the electric shock，
as the cells were treated with NPDM, there were faint fluorescence signals in the green channel, while the
obvious green fluorescences were observed after the cells were subjected to an electric shock. Intriguingly,
the green fluorescence signal in the group of low NPDM concentration is stronger than that in the group of
high NPDM concentration (Fig. 6F), which can be attributed to the bistructure of tweezers NPDM. Therefore,
it

is better to

use

conductive

polymer

electrodes

than

that

of

the

aluminum

electrodes

to maintain cellular homeostasis and promote cell survival. Noteworthily, it is the first reported smart
tweezers capable of verifying the leaking behavior of Al3+ ions during electroporation, which is beneficial to
select suitable electroporation electrode materials in future electroporation researches.
2.7 Practical application studies
In general, during the detection, we can directly observe the fluorescence color alterations with naked eyes
assisted by UV light. Nevertheless, the semiquantitative detection can not be achieved with this method, and
the result possibly can have the personal error.[16,138-140] Thus, to overcome these limitations and to access the
satisfactory detection accuracy and reliability, a smartphone-assisted intelligent sensing platform was built
based on the fluorogenic tweezers NPDM. All the fluorogenic photo colors from prepared samples (solutions
and cotton swabs) were captured, and then converted them into the precise readable digital information and
outputed the results (RGB values) using the APP ColorAsisst by employing the portable smartphone (Fig.7A).
In solution-phase, the relationship between the R/G ratio of the fluorescence color alterations and added Al 3+
concentration (0~10 µM) has linearity (R2 = 0.9686) (Fig. S17, ESI). The LOD of the RGB method was found
to be 82.8 nM. But the fly in the ointment was that the linearity was unsatisfactory. Thus, to improve the
linearity of the RGB assay, the solide-phase samples (cotton swab as the support) were prepared. Fig. 7B
shows that the fluorescence color was changed from green to yellow as compared with that in the solution,
and a reliable and better linear relationship (R2 = 0.98) between the R/G value and the Al3+ concentration (0~30
µM) was presented, and the LOD of the RGB platform was 45.4 nM, which confirmed the superiority of the
solid-state interface over a liquid surface. Although this method is imperfect at present, our RGB platform
constructed by fluorogenic tweezers NPDM and smartphone provides a promising analytical strategy for the
portable, semiquantitative, rapid, simple, and in-field visual detection of Al3+ and other analytes without any

complicated and costly apparatus, which is especially suitable for the deprived areas. Thus, as the abstracted
unknown sampled signals are introduced to the standard calibration curve, semiquantitative assessment of
unknown samples could be ascertained appropriately. In this way, quick and precise assessment of the
unknown samples could be obtained through integrating together and phototaking procedures utilizing a
smartphone with wide field applications (Fig. 7C).[141]
Aiming to further examine the practicality and reliability of the integrated sensing platform, we utilized the
as-proposed method for sensing Al3+ in real samples (the environment water samples, tea, Chinese wolfberry
and milk powder), like river water, bay water, tap water, and green tea. As shown in Table S3 (ESI), the
recoveries of Al3+ ranged from 91.07 % to 102.04 % with the low relative standard deviation (RSD) below
5 %, implying that this portable RGB system based on tweezers NPDM is fully competent for in-field sensing
Al3+ with the high reliability and accuracy in environmental water and food samples. The above results
conclude that the intelligent sensing platform has great latent capacity and feasibility for the semiquantitative
determination of Al3+ in real samples.


3. Conclusions
In summary, a novel ESIPT-active ɑ-naphtholphthalein-DAMN hydrazone NPDM was successfully

developed for enhanced identification specificity and efficiency toward Al3+. Molecular tweezers NPDM for
Al3+ sensing via ESIPT and CHEF mechanisms, demonstrates merits of dual emissions, splendid selectivity
and sensitivity with a very low LOD of 16.3 nM, large Stokes shifts (140 nm/176 nm), and real-time and
visualized sensing. The Job’s plot, HRMS, 1H NMR titrations, as well as detailed (TD)DFT calculations
elucidated the formation of a 1:2 NPDM-Al3+ complex with ESIPT “turn-on” process. Intriguingly, NPDMAl3+ ensemble can also be utilized as a subsequent fluorescence tweezers for the selective and sensitive
recognition of F- anions. Basing on this reversible sensing property, an advanced molecular memory device
was fabricated. Moreover, benefiting from the excellent optical performances and biocompatibility, NPDM
was efficiently applied in imaging the intracellular Al3+ and F- ions in Hela cells with good resistance to
oxidative stress, especially the OCl- and ONOO- species. More importantly, it is the first reported smart
tweezers capable of detecting the Al3+ ions formed during electroporation. Also to assess its practical
applications value, a smartphone-integrated intelligent platform was successfully built and applied to detect
Al3+ in water samples, and satisfactory recoveries were attained, which powerfully proved that NPDM
possesses a great practical potential for the visual detection of Al3+ in environmental samples with the
advantages of portability, simplicity, rapidity, low cost, and on-site sensing. Hence, according to the present
results, we believe that more efforts can be devoted to the progress of ESIPT-active fluorogenic tweezers and
helped to extend their practical application areas in the subsequent study.

Author contributions
Daoyong Jiang: conceptualization, data curation, investigation, writing–original draft, writing–review &
editing. Tingfei Xie: data curation, investigation, writing–original draft, writing–review & editing. Yizhao
Chen: data curation, writing–original draft, validation, writing–review & editing. Xiuwen Zhang: investigation,
methodology, writing –review & editing. Jihong Chen: investigation, methodology, writing –review & editing.
Xiaowei Qi: investigation, methodology, writing –review & editing. Pengfei Zhang: conceptualization,
funding acquisition, supervision, writing–review & editing. and Yong Wang: conceptualization, funding
acquisition, writing–review & editing.
All authors revised and approved the text.

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
