Soot is a short-lived climate forcing agent whose warming potential varies significantly during its
atmospheric lifetime. The particles of soot have a complex fractal morphology, but in atmospheric
aerosol models they are commonly represented as spheres. We show that taking the fractal
morphology into consideration significantly accelerates the rate of aging of soot aerosol in the
atmosphere because concave surfaces in fractal particles promote rapid capillary condensation of
trace gas chemicals produced from the photochemical oxidation of volatile organic compounds, even
when vapors of such chemicals are subsaturated. Our results suggest that by capillary condensation
alone these chemicals can transform hydrophobic soot particles into cloud condensation nuclei
within a few hours. Additionally, capillary condensation induces compaction of fractal soot even at
a moderately elevated relative humidity, changing its transport and optical properties. Representing
an important mechanism of atmospheric aging, capillary condensation has a profound effect on the
evolution of direct and indirect climate impacts of soot, at a higher rate than previously recognized,
and hence it must be incorporated into atmospheric aerosol models to improve their predictive
power.


As overshooting climate targets becomes a distinct possibility,1 various scenarios are proposed for
bringing the global temperature down quickly. Most scenarios rely on implementing carbon dioxide
removal 2 or even invoke use of various geoengineering approaches.3 Yet, curbing emissions of soot
may offer the greatest potential for slowing down climate change because of significantly shorter
lifetime of soot relative to carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases.4, 5 A product of incomplete
combustion, soot is ubiquitous worldwide 5 and can be present in more than half of ambient particles
in highly polluted atmospheric environments.6, 7 Due to its strong light absorption and poor light
scattering,8, 9 soot is a major global warming agent, and exposure to soot negatively affects human
health.10 In the atmosphere, aging of soot through interactions with other trace chemicals
significantly alters its composition and morphology.11-13 As a result, soot atmospheric lifetime,14, 15
its deposition in the human respiratory tract,16 and its direct 4 and indirect climate forcing 17 become
modified, making the knowledge of soot aging pathways paramount for accurate predictions of its
impacts. Whereas the importance of rigorous treatment of particle morphology in predicting soot
impacts has been clearly demonstrated,18 the role of morphology in evaluating its aging rate has
remained elusive.
Soot particles formed by fossil fuel combustion are lacey and hydrophobic,19 as illustrated in Fig.
1a. The hydrophobic soot particles are not scavenged from the atmosphere as easily as other aerosols
and show little morphological variability between dry and humid environments. However, after
mixing with water-soluble chemicals during atmospheric aging, soot particles can take up water and
undergo compaction, as demonstrated in laboratory studies using both individual trace gas
chemicals 20, 21 and mixtures of condensable chemicals produced through oxidation of precursor
compounds.22-24 Field studies conducted in urban environments have closely associated the
morphological compaction of soot particles with the extent of their aging,25, 26 and the presence of a
thick coating has become a criterion for switching from fractal to compact morphology when
predicting the impacts of soot in aerosol models.27 Thus, the observation of compact soot particles
lacking visible coatings reported by a field study conducted in a remote marine free troposphere and
supported by cloud chamber experiments was rather unexpected.28, 29 This compaction was attributed
to cloud processing, where soot particles underwent a cloud droplet activation-evaporation cycle.
However, since bare soot particles cannot form cloud droplets at atmospherically relevant water
supersaturations,19 small amounts of sulfuric acid or water-soluble oxidized organics must have
condensed on those particles during aging, making them cloud active.22, 30

Aging of soot in a remote marine free troposphere would be a slow process in current aerosol models,
as a significant vapor saturation is required to overcome the Kelvin effect and initiate the
condensation of trace gas chemicals on bare soot particles, which are represented as spheres. On the
contrary, our recent experiments have shown that in the case of real soot, even subsaturated vapors
can condense promptly on fractal particles, resulting in minor but detectable compaction.31 This has
led us to hypothesize that concurrent capillary condensation of water-soluble trace chemicals and
water vapor on fractal soot particles can result in their significant compaction and serve as a highly
sensitive indicator of the transformation of initially hydrophobic soot to a hydrophilic state, and
possibly to cloud condensation nuclei (CCN). To test this hypothesis, here we performed
experiments where fractal soot particles were exposed to subsaturated vapors of several trace
chemicals and then to progressively higher relative humidity (RH). To quantify the amounts of vapor


transferred to the particle phase, we modeled 32, 33 the step-by-step condensation of the trace chemical
and water in concave menisci of the fractal soot particles, as shown in Fig. 1. We found that the
depressed vapor pressure of the condensate above the menisci promoted rapid capillary condensation
even under subsaturated conditions. To assess the role of capillary condensation in the aging of soot
in the atmosphere, we extended our single-component model 32, 33 towards multi-component vapors
and employed this new multi-component capillary condensation model (MCCCM) in conjunction
with the particle-resolved PartMC-MOSAIC 34 aerosol model to explore a scenario representing the
remote atmosphere.
Results and Discussion
Soot restructuring experiments. Subjecting size-classified soot aerosol (240 nm) to singlecomponent vapors in a saturator reservoir partially filled with liquid or solid chemicals at room
temperature produced no measurable increase in the particle mass. However, particle mobility
diameter showed a small decrease (Fig. 2a, 5% RH). As reported previously,31 such shrinkage of
fractal soot after exposure to subsaturated vapors is indicative of capillary condensation, which
places the condensate directly into junctions between the primary spheres, resulting in unbalanced
forces that induce restructuring.32, 35, 36 The absence of a measurable particle mass gain suggests that
the amount of condensate in our experiments was less than 2-3%, the precision of our mass
measurement. Such a mass gain corresponds to a coating thickness of ~0.3 nm, if the condensate is
distributed uniformly over the particle surface, or to a filling angle 1 = 35°, if the condensate is
placed entirely into junctions (Fig. 1c).
Despite the small amount of condensate, in most cases soot particles restructured when relative
humidity was increased above its baseline value of 5%, and the response depended significantly on
the coating material (Fig. 2a). The largest shrinkage was observed for soot particles treated with
triethylene glycol (TEG) and its monobutyl ether (TEGMBE). Such particles restructured
continuously with an increase in humidity, reaching maximum compaction at 85% RH, as also
confirmed by Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) (Fig. 2d). Soot particles treated with ammonium
nitrate (AN) and sulfuric acid (SA) also evolved continuously with an increase in humidity, but
showed a lower ultimate shrinkage at RH 85%. A typical SEM image of such particles is presented
in Fig. 2c. Notable is the absence of the deliquescence transition for AN, an effect previously
reported for pure AN particles.37 On the contrary, soot particles treated with glutaric acid (GA)


remained unchanged at RH below 70%, but showed a sharp shrinkage upon reaching the
deliquescence point of GA, 83.5−85% RH.38 Bare soot particles and soot particles treated with TDA
showed no additional shrinkage during humidification because fresh soot is highly hydrophobic and
TDA is immiscible with water. The difference in the extent of restructuring between different
chemicals can be related to the condensate amount, which can be predicted by a numerical model,
as described in the following section.


treated by different chemicals. TEGMBE is excluded in f due to lack of aqueous solution data. Initial
mobility diameter of fractal soot particles is 240 nm, and the chemicals used are ammonium nitrate (AN),
glutaric acid (GA), sulfuric acid (SA), tetradecane (TDE), triethylene glycol (TEG), and triethylene glycol
monobutyl ether (TEGMBE). Gfd and several other parameters used to express changes in the particle size
and morphology are defined in the Methods section.

Modeling of capillary condensation of vapors of individual chemicals and water. We used our
recently developed capillary condensation model 32, 33 to predict the volume of condensate gained
by fractal soot particles, as they traveled through the saturator. Fig. 2e shows the increase in volume,
expressed as the filling angle 𝜃1 (see Fig. 1c-d for reference), for different chemicals. The zero time
corresponds to the saturator entrance and the 10° initial filling angle is due to the carbon neck
between primary spheres (Supplementary information, section 5). After entering the saturator, the
aerosol flow became gradually saturated by the evaporating and diffusing chemical, reaching a vapor
saturation 𝜈 = 0.9 at the saturator exit. Despite identical vapor saturation for all chemicals, the
model predicted vastly different condensate filling angles after a 25 s exposure: 48 for TDA, 45
for TEG and TEGMBE, 16 for GA, 14 for AN, and 11 for SA. One factor causing this spread was
different wetting of the soot particle surface by different condensates. The second factor was related
to the difference between vapor pressure above bulk material loaded in the saturator and vapor
pressure above the condensate on particles. The latter was controlled by either the phase state or
concentration of the chemical in the condensate, producing significantly different vapor saturations
relative to particle phase, 𝑆 (equation 4 in Methods, Supplementary sections 2 and 6). Despite the
different saturation ratios, the filling angle of condensate reached a steady state value for all
chemicals except for SA, corresponding to an equilibrium between the meniscus and surrounding
vapor. The equilibrium was never achieved for SA because its vapor was highly supersaturated
relative to particles (𝑆 = 11.9) due to a significant stabilization of the SA condensate by hydration
even at the residual 5% RH (Supplementary section 6). The high supersaturation of SA vapor
produced an exponential increase in the filling angle with exposure time, but the total amount of
condensate gained by the particles upon exiting the reservoir was limited by the low SA saturation
vapor pressure. Overall, mass fractions of condensed chemicals predicted by our model were 0.1–
3.7%, ranging from well below (SA) to slightly above (TDA) experimentally detectable mass gain.
Such small amounts, when placed in the junctions, created sufficiently strong capillary forces to
initiate small but measurable restructuring of the soot aggregates. Indeed, comparing 𝜃1 at the
saturator exit predicted by the model (Fig. 2e) against the extent of restructuring at the lowest


humidity measured in the experiments (Fig. 2a) shows a clear trend, where a higher 𝜃1 corresponds
to a more significant decrease in the particle growth factor by diameter, Gfd. This observation is in
agreement with previous studies performed using significantly larger amounts of single-component
condensates.20, 21, 39 In the following, we describe the increase in the filling angle by capillary
condensation of water when these hydrophilic soot aggregates were exposed to progressively higher
RH.
Most chemicals in our study can absorb water vapor, increasing in volume by a factor of 1.6 − 4.1
at 85% RH (Supplementary Table 8). For most atmospheric particles this hygroscopic growth is
partially suppressed by the positive curvature from the Kelvin effect, but in fractal soot the curvature
is negative in the gaps between primary spheres, promoting capillary condensation of water, and
resulting in a higher growth factor by volume, Gfv. To compute the equilibrium fraction of absorbed
water in menisci, we used an iterative procedure (Supplementary section 7), similar to the previous
work.40 The predicted dependence of the humidified filling angle 𝜃2 on RH (Supplementary Fig. 6)
shows an increase in the meniscus volume, corresponding to an estimated Gfv of 19.0, 9.3, 3.5, and
2.4 for SA, AN, GA, and TEG, respectively. These values are well in excess of the bulk Gfv values,
pointing to the enhancement of water vapor absorption on hydrophilic soot aggregates by the
capillary effect.
By combining the experimental Gfd with the calculated humidified 𝜃2 , we relate the degree of
restructuring to the amount of aqueous condensate in Fig. 2f. Like in Fig. 2a, the points form two
clusters: (1) TEG and (2) GA, AN, and SA. Here TEG shows the largest filling angle and the most
significant decrease in Gfd. Despite its lowest hygroscopicity, TEG produced the most condensate
under dry and humid conditions because of the relatively low contact angles of its neat liquid and
aqueous solution. GA experienced a deliquescence transition at 85% RH, absorbing a larger than
TEG amount of water, but producing less restructuring because at low RH it condensed in a smaller
amount due to both a higher contact angle (Supplementary Table 2) and a lower vapor saturation
(Supplementary section 6). In the case of AN, the small initial volume increased significantly after
humidification due the high hygroscopicity of this chemical, resulting in 𝜃2 and Gfd comparable to
those of GA. The filling angle of SA increased significantly during humidification because of its
high hygroscopicity. Despite the small amount, SA caused comparable to GA restructuring upon
humidification that may be related to the higher surface tension of SA, resulting in stronger capillary


forces.35, 41 Furthermore, SA condensed not only in the junctions but also over the entire particle
surface.32, 33 Hence, after humidification some of the aqueous SA condensate could be transported
into the junctions, resulting in a larger filling angle than that predicted by our model. During this
transport, the high contact angle of aqueous SA could have induced dynamic effects related to the
condensate contact line pinning,42 producing larger momentary forces, which enhanced
restructuring.
Capillary condensation on fractal soot in the atmosphere. Under realistic atmospheric conditions,
soot particles are exposed to multiple condensing chemicals that are present at significantly lower
concentrations than in our laboratory experiments. To assess the role of capillary condensation on
soot in the atmosphere, we extended our model towards multi-component vapors (Supplementary
section 8). We then used this multi-component capillary condensation model (MCCCM) in
conjunction with the particle-resolved PartMC-MOSAIC aerosol model 34 to explore relevant
atmospheric scenarios. Here we illustrate our findings using a remote atmosphere scenario, because
in a polluted urban atmosphere the condensation of highly supersaturated sulfuric acid can mask the
contribution from capillary condensation of subsaturated organic vapors.
In this remote atmosphere scenario (Fig. 3a), soot emitted in an urban area (e.g., Durham, NC) during
the night travels above a forested land (e.g., Duke Forest, NC), undergoing aging by the oxidation
products of biogenic monoterpenes represented in PartMC-MOSAIC by -pinene and limonene.
Anthropogenic hydrocarbons are present in lower concentrations and their oxidation products
contribute insignificantly. These organic oxidation products are hydrophilic but not hygroscopic,
and hence do not absorb water at RH < 100%. Upon sunrise around 7 am, the gaseous oxidation
products begin to build up, peaking in the late afternoon and then decreasing in concentration (Fig.
3b) as a result of an interplay between their generation from precursor hydrocarbons (Supplementary
Fig. 9d and 10a), partitioning to existing aerosol, and dilution due to the variation in boundary layer
height (Supplementary Fig. 9c). The vapor saturation, 𝑆tot, which is the sum of individual saturations
of condensable species, lags behind the concentrations due to elevated daytime temperatures
(Supplementary Fig. 9a). When no absorbing material is initially present on soot particles, the
condition 𝑆tot > 1 is used as a threshold for the formation of organic condensate.43 In the biogenic
scenario, this condition is met during a relatively narrow period between 4:30 pm and 10:30 pm.
Hence, spherical soot particles, as implemented in PartMC-MOSAIC, remain bare throughout the


morning and most of the afternoon (Fig. 3c). Their growth begins only around 4:30 pm, peaking at
a condensate volume fraction of 0.12 just before midnight, when about 20% of these particles
become CCN at an atmospherically relevant water supersaturation of 0.2% (Fig. 3d).

On the contrary, as predicted by MCCCM, capillary condensation on fractal soot begins already at
7 am (Fig. 3c), and by 9 am there is sufficient amount of condensate to make nearly 10% of soot
particles CCN-active (Fig. 3d). The prompt condensation on fractal soot at low 𝑆tot is a result of the


vapor pressure depression from the negative meniscus curvature (Supplementary Fig. 10d), giving
such fractal particles a significant advantage over spherical particles. The volume fraction of
condensate closely follows 𝑆tot and peaks at 0.34 around 7 pm, when nearly 80% of fractal soot
particles become CCN. Although in later hours some of the condensate is lost by evaporation, a
significant fraction of particles remain cloud active. Notably, when the filling angle reaches 45° at 4
pm (Fig. 3c), fractal aggregates are expected to begin restructuring (Fig. 2f), becoming significantly
compacted by 7 pm when the filling angle reaches 80°. The partial evaporation of the condensate
during late afternoon would convert these aggregates into highly compact globules.31 Although
described as solid spheres in aerosol models, such compact globules possess appreciable void space
that can be treated as pores and hold significant amount of condensate.44 If such atmospheric soot
were sampled in the afternoon, it would be found to consist of soot particles that are compact, but
lack visible coating, as has been reported earlier in field studies conducted at various locations.29, 45,
46

Notably, the morphological and CCN behavior similar as predicted by our MCCCM model has

been observed in chamber experiments with fractal soot aged by OH-initiated photochemical
oxidation of monoethanolamine.24 Intermediate volatility oxidation products of monoethanolamine
underwent reversible capillary condensation, causing a partial collapse of soot aggregates at a
condensate mass fraction of 17%. The CCN activity of such particles followed the amount of
condensate, increasing initially and then decreasing when the condensate partially evaporated.24
Another remarkable feature observed in our simulation is that after midnight, despite the lower
average amount of condensate (Fig. 3c) fractal soot is more CCN active than spherical soot (Fig.
3d). This is because for fractal particles the fraction of condensate does not vary with the size of
aggregates, whereas for spherical particles it decreases with increasing particle size, making larger
spherical particles relatively less hygroscopic. Since cloud activation depends both on particle size
and amount of water-soluble material, fractal soot produces more CCN.
The rapid processing of fractal soot by capillary condensation in a remote environment, as shown in
our simulations, may alter soot properties and climate impacts faster than predicted in the
atmospheric models using the spherical particle representation. Decreased size and increased
hydrophilicity of such processed soot particles will shorten their atmospheric lifetime by accelerating
coagulation and scavenging. Water taken up into pores of hydrophilic soot aggregates by capillary
condensation can freeze homogeneously at cirrus temperatures and subsequently grow into
macroscopic ice crystals.44 Soot particles acting as cloud condensation and ice nuclei can change the

structure and radiative effects of clouds, e.g., leading to a reduction in low-level clouds and an
increase in high-altitude cirrus cloud thickness, exacerbating the global mean surface warming.17
When embedded inside cloud droplets, soot particles show a significant amplification in light
absorption, nearly by an order of magnitude.47, 48 After droplet evaporation, thinly coated compact
soot particles would have a comparable light absorption but a 50% larger light scattering than the
original fractal aggregates,49 resulting in a larger single scattering albedo.29
We tested if it is possible to reproduce the aging rate of fractal soot by using spherical particles precoated with non-volatile and water-insoluble organic material (OC) to promote partitioning in lieu
of capillary condensation. Fig. 3c shows that at a 0.25 volume fraction of OC, spherical soot particles
gain condensate at a comparable rate as fractal particles because OC absorbs subsaturated vapors.
Accordingly, such mixed particles show comparable to fractal particles CCN activity (Fig. 3d).
However, the optical properties of such fresh OC-containing particles differ significantly from bare
soot, exhibiting higher light scattering and absorption, by 45% and 12%, respectively. Hence, an
improvement in the treatment of indirect effect of soot comes at the expense of a biased treatment
of its direct effect. Additionally, when vapor saturation drops at night, the condensate does not
evaporate off such mixed particles like in the case of fractal soot (Fig. 3c), making it impossible to
explain observations of uncoated compact aggregates reported in field measurements. Hence,
capillary condensation must be incorporated into atmospheric aerosol models explicitly to improve
their predictive power.
Online content
Any methods, additional references, Nature Portfolio reporting summaries, source data, extended
data, supplementary information, acknowledgements, peer review information; details of author
contributions and 1competing interests; and statements of data and code availability are available
online.
