The reaction of phenanthroline diamide bearing a bromoaryl moiety on the amide
substituent in the presence of palladium catalyst proceeded efficiently to afford multiplyfused phenanthroline derivatives through intramolecular C–H arylation. The obtained
diamide derivatives was found to extract lanthanide remarkably highly efficiently with
distribution ratio (D: up to ca. 500) and it was also found show the metal-selective
extraction (separation factor SF = up to 4.4).

Recycle of rare metals has attracted increasing interest recently in connection with the
utilization of resources. Much efforts have been devoted to the efficient recovery of metal
resources. Solvent extraction has been an effective tool for the recovery of metals and the
development of metal-specific extracting agent has been our major concern. Recovery of
rare-earth elements is particularly important due to the use of those as a wide range of
electronic devices, which remarkably increase the demand recently.1 Because of the
difficulty in the metal-selective separation of rare-earth due to the similarity of there
chemical properties, currently used extraction process employing phosphorous acid
derivatives2,3 requires multiple stages to guarantee the metal purity. Phenanthroline
derivatives has recently attracted remarks as a selective and highly efficient extractant for
rare-earth metals.4–14
Construction of organic skeleton of complex structures is of great concern in synthetic
chemistry. Transition metal catalysis plays a key role in the formation carbon-carbon and
carbon-heteroatom bonds.15–17 In particular, such bond-forming reactions utilizing a C–H
bond has attracted major concern recently in conjunction with the point of atom efficiency
and step efficiency, etc.18–20 When the reaction was designed to be performed in a
intramolecular manner,21,22 the protocol is considered to be a powerful tool for the
formation of fused ring structures.
Accordingly, our concern has centered to the concise preparation of heteroaromatic ring
structure employing transition metal catalysis and we have been engaged in the
application of C–H bond functionalization for the purpose of the construction of a variety
of heteroaromatic compounds.23–25 Intramolecular application of such a C–H bond
functionalization has been an attractive issue in organic synthesis to build a ring structure
in a facile manner and the application to several heteroaromatic molecules including
pyridines and their more fused analogs would also be a significant challenge to form a
fused heteroaromatic skeleton. Recent publication on the extraction of lanthanides with
fused phenanthroline amide derivatives by Popova and coworkers26 prompted us to report
our continuing separate researches. We herein describes palladium-catalyzed annulative
formation of fused phenanthroline through the C–H functionalization reaction and our
preliminary studies on several metal extraction with thus obtained fused phenanthrolines.


Synthesis of phenanthroline 2,9-dicalboxamide 4 was performed by the reaction of the
acid chloride 2 of phenanthroline-2,9-dicarboxylic acid 1, which was subjected to the
reaction with thionyl chloride, with N-alkylated 2-bromoaniline derivative 3. The reaction
was found to proceed smoothly to afford 4 in good to excellent yields.27 Phenanthroline
diamide bearing no bromo group at the 2-position of the benzene ring 5 was prepared in
a similar manner. The related mono amide 6 (X = Br) and 6' (X = H) were also synthesized.
The obtained amide 4 was then subjected to the intramolecular C–H coupling reaction at
the 3-position of phenanthroline and at the C–Br bond of the aniline moiety.18 We first
examined the reaction with 4a under similar conditions shown in previous C–H arylation
with pyridine derivatives.28,29 When the reaction was carried out in the presence of 10
mol% of palladium acetate, 2.0 equivalents of tetra-n-butylammonium bromide, and 2.0
equivalents of potassium carbonate in N, N-dimethylacetamide (DMA) as a solvent at
110 °C for 16 h, the C–H coupling reaction proceeded to afford the multiply fused diamide
7a in 85% yield.
The measurement of 1H NMR spectrum of 7a showed the characteristic singlet signal at
8.96 ppm assigned as the hydrogen atom at the 4 and 7-positions of the phenanthroline
ring suggesting that C–H coupling took place at the 3 and 8-positions.


Several amide derivatives 7 bearing different alkyl substituent and a substituent at the 4position of aniline were also subjected to the C–H coupling reaction in a similar manner
and found that the coupling reaction proceeded smoothly to afford a variety of multiply
fused diamides. The result is summarized in Table 1. The coupling reaction proceeded
smoothly in good to excellent yields irrespective of the effect of alkyl substituents and
the substituent on the aniline moiety.

We have attempted to carry out the C–H coupling reaction with a reduced amount of
catalyst loading of palladium, however, the reaction was found to proceed much slower.
The reaction was examined with diamide 4a (R = 2-ethylhexyl; R' = H). When the amount
of Pd(OAc)2 was reduced to 5.0 mol%, the yield of 7a decreased to 67% and no reaction
took place with the use of 1.0 mol% of Pd(OAc)2 with recovery of starting material 4a.
We thus studied the effect of the ligand of palladium. Among a variety of ligand examined,
the use of Buchwald-type phosphines30 (RuPhos, t-BuXPhos, BrettPhos, SPhos) in the
presence of 2.5 mol% Pd(OAc)2 was found ineffective to yield only <10% of the desired
product 7a.18 The yield of 7a was slightly improved when JackiePhos was employed as a
ligand (35%). Remarkably improved yields were observed in the use of CyJohnPhos
(81%), PhDavePhos (97%), and tricylohexylphosphine (85%).
Table 2. The reaction of 4a catalyzed by palladium in the presence of Buchwald-type
phosphine ligands a
4a

Yield (%) c
7a

RuPhos (L1)

74

trace

t-BuXPhos (L2)
SPhos (L3)
BrettPhos (L4)
JackiePhos (L5)
CyJohnPhos (L6)
PhDavePhos (L7)
Cy3P d

58
>99
67
22
0
0
0

4
1
10
35
81
97
85

entry

Ligand b

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

a The reaction was carried out with cyclization precursor 4a (0.16 mmol), Pd cat. (2.5 mol%), ligand (10 mol%), KOAc

(0.32 mmol), and n-Bu4NBr (0.32 mmol) in 5 mL of DMA at 110 °C for 18 h under an argon atmosphere. b Details on
Buchwald-type ligand L1–L7: See Supporting Information. c The yield was determined by 1H NMR analysis using
C2H4Cl2 as ab internal standard. d Cy: tricyclohexyl

We then studied the reaction of the related phenanthroline monoamide 6a under similar
conditions. However, the coupling reaction was found to take place much less efficiently.
When the reaction was carried out 10 mol% of Pd(OAc)2 under similar conditions, the
yield of the coupling product 8a was found to decrease to 31% accompanied by the
recovery of starting amide 6a (31%). The reaction at the elevated temperatures (130 °C
and 150 °C) resulted in little improvement. Although the addition of phosphine ligand
was also examined, improvement of the yield of 8a was hardly observed as found in the

case of the formation of diamide 7a (See Supporting Information). The optimum yield
was observed in the use of Pd(OCOCF3)2 as a catalyst31 to give 83% of 8a whereas 20%
of catalyst loading was the requirement.

Employing thus obtained phenanthroline amide derivatives 7 we next performed the
extraction studies of lanthanides. A mixture of 14 lanthanides(III) nitrate (La to Lu) where
pH was arranged to 3.0. The resulting aqueous phase was extracted into the 1.0 mM
organic solution of phenanthroline ligand 7 in 1,2-dichloroethane by shaking at 25 °C for
90 min. The extraction performance was analyzed by ICP–MS with the remained aqueous
solution of lanthanide and shown as distribution ratio D of each metal. The selectivity of
lanthanides was expressed with separation factor SF, which was defined by the ratio of D
of the corresponding metals.
Figure 1 shows the result of extraction with the multiply fused phenanthroline 7a–7c for
the comparison of the effect of alkyl substituent at the amide nitrogen. The result shows
that phenanthroline diamide with the cyclized structure extracts early lanthanides 57La to
62
Sm efficiently whereas extraction of 63Eu to 71Lu results in inferior. The distribution
ratio for La of diamide 7c bearing longer alkyl chain (R = noctyl) showed remarkably high
DLa = 131, while DLa of 7b and 7a was slightly lower (DLa = 41 and 15, respectively).
Since the D value of 7 decreased as the increase of the atomic number of lanthanide, the
different D values between early lanthanides was observed and thus appeared marked
separation factor in 59Pr and 60Nd (SFPr/Nd = 2.3).


Figure 3 shows the extraction of lanthanides in 7c with that of the related monoamide of
cyclized 8 (R = nC8H17) The performance of 7c was compared with that of cyclized
monoamide analog 8 bearing the same alkyl and aryl substituents. The result suggested
that specific extraction of early lanthanides in 7c was only found in the diamide structure,
while the cyclized monoamide 8 showed mostly equal extraction in 14 lanthanides
(SFLa/Lu = 1.3).

DLa = 95, SFPr/Nd = 2.31

DLa = 0.56, SFPr/Nd = 1.65

Figure 3. Difference of the extraction performance between cyclized diamide 7c and the
related monoamide 8


Table 3 summarizes the results of the distribution ratio and the separation factor of 7 with
various substituent at the benzene ring of the aniline moiety. The D value of La and SF of
Pr/Nd was shown as a representative example. The performance was found to depend on
the substituent structure on the anilide moiety. An electron donating group on the benzene
ring suggested superior distribution ratio D, while an electron withdrawing chloro group
showed a lower D value. Multiply fused diamide bearing a methoxy group 7f and a tbutyl group 7h showed rather high distribution ratio (DLa= 476 and 181, respectively).

We consider that such high extraction and selectivity to early lanthanides are attributed
by the fused structure of phenanthroline ring, which limits rotation of the carbon–carbon
single bond between pyridine rings. In addition, the formation of the cyclic structure of
amide further improves the conformationally rigid structure of 7. Since the further fused
benzene also enhances the planarity, a remarkably superior extraction of a specific
lanthanide ion would be achieved, accordingly.
Summary
We have shown facile synthesis of multiply fused phenanthroline diamides, which extract
lanthanides highly efficiently. The fused diamide derivatives extracted early lanthanides
more selectively and efficiently than the related monoamide. Such a simple and diversityoriented synthetic protocol allowed the preparation of diamide derivatives with a wide
range of structural analogs and thus the synthesis can lead to the tuning of the extraction
performances.
