ABSTRACT The chemical structures of dissolved organic compounds in natural waters,
including degree of aromaticity, affect their physical, chemical, and biological properties and
ultimately the fate of carbon in aquatic systems and during water treatment. Herein, a new
fluorescence-based aromaticity index named ARIX is shown to link the composition of aquatic
dissolved organic matter to its relative aromaticity across diverse aquatic systems. ARIX predicts
SUVA, a widely used proxy of aromaticity, as well as the percentage of polycyclic aromatic and
polyphenolic molecular formulas determined by FT-ICR MS and the ratio of “humic substances”
to “building blocks” fractions determined by LC-OCD. A meta-analysis of nine datasets
spanning all seven continents suggests that a single linear relationship predicts SUVA from
ARIX in both bulk and extracted DOM. In impounded waterbodies exhibiting decoupling
between DOC and absorbance linked to extensive biogeochemical processing, linearity can be
restored by accounting for the interaction between absorbance and ARIX. The results deliver
new insights on widely discussed trends in DOM optical properties and on the molecular
structures underlying optical measurements in aquatic milieu. They further pave the way for new
optical technologies capable of real-time predictions of DOC concentration, reactivity and fate.

Predicting the fate of dissolved organic matter (DOM) in aquatic systems requires the ability to
detect changes in the chemical composition of DOM (1, 2). DOM consists of potentially
thousands of compounds of varying age and structural complexity including those derived from
the degradation of biomass as well as compounds released as by-products of metabolism or
chemical processes (3). In river systems the molecular characteristics of DOM affect ecosystem
health (4) and determine whether DOM will leave the water column via biological or
photochemical mineralization, flocculation/precipitation or adsorption, or be transported
downstream and stored in the deep sea (2, 5).
DOM aromaticity is widely studied due to its influence on wide-ranging chemical and
biological processes in water. Aromatic compounds resist degradation due to their stable
conjugated π-electron systems; when combined with the continuous export of aromatic DOM
from land this contributes to the overall carbon storage of aquatic systems over long timescales
(1, 6). Aromatic compounds control primary production by attenuating light underwater and by
binding and retaining nutrients within their molecular structures (7, 8). During drinking water
treatment, large polyaromatic compounds are more susceptible to flocculation (9, 10) and
compete more effectively with micropollutants for sites on adsorption filters, leading to their
premature saturation (11, 12). The selective removal of polyphenolic and other compounds
during water treatment further affects the abundance, types, and toxicity of disinfection byproducts formed during subsequent reactions with chlorine (13).
DOM relative aromaticity, referring to the proportion of carbon atoms associated with
aromatic bonds, is a bulk property of the pool of molecules that comprise DOM (14). Relative
aromaticity determined using Carbon-13 nuclear magnetic resonance, 13C-NMR, is strongly


correlated to the ratio of UV absorption at 254 nm normalized to DOC concentration, termed
specific UV absorbance or commonly SUVA (14, 15). In natural waters containing low
concentrations of dissolved iron, SUVA typically spans the range 1 - 6 m2g-1C (16, 17). Since
measuring 13C-NMR aromaticity is relatively impractical, SUVA is routinely measured in its
place. However, SUVA has technical shortcomings due to requiring two different instruments (a
carbon analyser and a spectrophotometer), which starkly increases measurement costs and
negatively affects immediacy, accuracy and precision (16, 18).
Fluorescence spectroscopy is widely used to study DOM composition and three fluorescence
indices based on simple emission ratios are also widely used proxies of aromaticity (15): the
“fluorescence index” (FI or FIX), “freshness” or “biological index” (β/α and BIX), and
“humification index” HIX (19-22). However, their sensitivities to differences in aromaticity are
limited (15, 16) and a theoretical basis underpinning their variability, and demonstrated links to
specific DOM molecular structures, are missing (15, 23). Recently, a multispectral fluorescence
index (“PARIX”) derived using parallel factor analysis (PARAFAC) was used to explain
differences in treatment efficiencies among waters with different SUVA subjected to
standardized water treatments (16). PARIX was defined as the ratio of two PARAFAC
components, one with peak emissions above 500 nm, and the other with peak emissions around
400 nm. In treated and untreated drinking water samples from Europe, Asia and North America,
PARIX predicted SUVA aromaticity more accurately than FI, HIX or BIX.
While equations using PARAFAC ratios can be useful, it is unclear whether PARAFAC
models can be generalized to other datasets or to different types of aquatic systems. Also, the
requirement to perform a PARAFAC analysis has practical limitations in monitoring applications
since the components are first obtained from modelling sets of multispectral data matrices,

requiring many samples and relatively complicated data processing (24). By reanalyzing
published datasets spanning the river to ocean continuum, the present study aimed to identify
robust algorithms for predicting DOC aromaticity and abundance from in situ spectral
measurements. The results provide new insights into the molecular structures underpinning
optical measurements and a technical basis for monitoring DOC concentrations and aromaticity
in real-time.

Nine published datasets comprising ~1000 samples were re-analysed for this study (Table S1).
The datasets were created by eight independent research groups during the past two decades.
They span all seven continents, include bulk DOM and extracts, with samples from inland
surface waters (rivers, lakes, drinking water plants), groundwater, coastal waters, and the ocean.
At minimum each dataset contains SUVA measurements plus fluorescence excitation-emission
matrices (EEMs) and/or a PARAFAC model. SUVA was typically determined by the traditional
USEPA method, which divides absorbance at 254 nm measured on a spectrophotometer (A254)
by DOC concentration measured on a separate TOC analyser (18), and sometimes by sizeexclusion liquid chromatography with organic carbon detection (LC-OCD), which combines
both detectors in a single instrument (25). Fluorescence intensities were measured on filtered
samples in a 1-cm cell using a scanning excitation-emission (EEM) fluorometer. Absorbance
was measured in a 1-cm cell within an Aqualog fluorometer or using a separate UV-vis
spectrophotometer and a 1-cm or 5-cm cell. SUVA in this article is expressed in units m2g-1C
which is equivalent to L mgC−1 m−1.

Two datasets (Isolates and Everglades) were used to test the generality of PARIX, the
PARAFAC-based index developed for estimating percent aromaticity in bulk DOM (16).
Philibert et al. (16) defined PARIX as the ratio of two components referred to as Hii and Hiii,
where Hii represents a long-wavelength component with peak emissions above 500 nm and Hiii
represents a shorter-wavelength component with peak emissions near 400 nm. Specifically, it
was tested whether PARIX derived from different PARAFAC models and different research
groups predicts SUVA in bulk EEMs (Everglades) or in DOM extracts (Isolates). In both cases,
the raw data consisted of PARAFAC loadings reported in published tables and PARIX was
calculated as the ratio between reported Fmax values for components similar to Hii and Hiii. The
Isolates dataset included Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry (FT-ICR
MS) performed on diverse DOM sources (17). This dataset was used to test whether PARIX
predicts the relative abundance of molecular formulae associated with polycyclic aromatic and
polyphenol compounds.
Eight datasets comprising whole-water DOM samples (Alaska Rivers (26)., Australia (27),
Congo (28) , Everglades (29), Horsens (30), S. America (31), SUEZ (16), Yukon Lakes (32))
were used to assess correlations between SUVA and a newly identified fluorescence ratio called
ARIX. ARIX is defined as the ratio of emission intensities detected at two fixed emission
wavelengths (520 nm / 390 nm) when excited by light at 320 nm. ARIX tracks the ratio of
PARAFAC components identified by Philibert et al. (16) and referred to as Hii and Hiii. Since Hiii
overlaps spectrally with several ubiquitous PARAFAC components with emission peaks between
400 - 450 nm (16, 33-35), the ARIX algorithm was designed to track PARIX using wavelengths
that avoid interfering fluorescence from non-target fluorophores.


To estimate ARIX in the Isolates dataset, the fluorescence EEMs had to first be reconstructed
from the reported PARAFAC model. Kellerman et al. (17) tabulated PARAFAC loadings and
Fmax values, which is sufficient information for estimating the original EEMs using published
algorithms (24, 36). The reconstructed dataset doesn’t account for model residuals associated
with lack of fit between the PARAFAC model and the primary dataset. Furthermore, it includes
new error sources because the model loadings were reported with low machine precision.
Consequently, a lower correlation is expected between SUVA and (reconstructed) ARIX than if
the latter were derived from the primary EEM dataset. For the same reason, ARIX values
determined for the Isolates dataset are not directly comparable to fluorescence indices reported
by Kellerman et al. (17).
2.3 Regression models
For each dataset, individual regression models were calculated in MATLAB (ver. 2022a) using
the fitlm function to predict SUVA with model y� = β1 (P)ARIX + β0 . Models were made with

and without MATLAB’s robust statistics option that performs automatic outlier exclusion.
Regressions were additionally calculated using four widely used fluorescence indices as the
independent variable in place of ARIX. These were FI (“fluorescence index”), HIX
(“humification index”), β/α (“freshness index”) and BIX (“biological index”). FI was calculated

as the ratio of emission intensities detected at 470 and 520 nm upon excitation at 370 nm (19).
HIX was calculated as the sum of emissions at 435-480 nm divided by the sum of emissions
from 300–345 and 435–480 nm following excitation at 254 nm (20). BIX was calculated as the
ratio of emission intensities detected at 430 and 380 nm upon excitation at 310 nm (37). β/α was
calculated as the ratio of emission detected at 380 nm to the maximum emission detected at 420-

435 nm upon excitation at 310 nm (21). The algorithms for BIX and β/α produced negligible
differences in regressions with SUVA so BIX alone is reported herein.
To derive a global model linking SUVA and ARIX for all whole-waters, a model II
(geometric) regression was calculated using lsqfitgm code from MBARI (38). Prior to regression
analyses, outliers were excluded from three datasets: Horsens: samples with SUVA below 2 or
above 8 m2g-1C and (marine) samples from the estuary were excluded; Australia: one erroneous
data point was excluded, and Yukon Lakes: one sample with extremely high DOC (>120 mg/L)
was excluded. The Isolates dataset was analysed separately using ARIX derived from the
reconstructed fluorescence EEMs.
Multiple linear regressions were performed using the regress function in MATLAB with A254
and ARIX as independent variables and DOC the dependent variable. There was no significant
main effect of ARIX in any dataset, but there was a significant main effect on A254 in all datasets,
and a significant interaction between A254 and ARIX in all datasets except S. America. Intercepts
were also significant in all datasets but Yukon Lakes. The final model for each dataset retains
only the statistically significant coefficients.
2.4 Sensitivity analysis
Fluorescence, absorbance, and DOC detectors have different inherent sensitivities, and
instruments from different manufacturers (and even different versions of the same model) have
varying levels of sensitivity and bias. A simulation was performed to estimate how much of the
scatter in the relationship between ARIX and SUVA in bulk EEMs might be explained by only
random (unbiased) errors. In this simulation, the model II regression equation was assumed to
represent the true relationship between ARIX and SUVA. The eight bulk EEM datasets were
used to generate a simulated dataset containing identical values of each DOC, SUVA and ARIX.

Only A254 was allowed to vary, and it was calculated from Eq. 1 so that the simulated dataset
would align perfectly with the regression equation. Finally, a random error residual was added to
each variable in each sample, selected from a random distribution defined according to Table S3.
The simulation was run 100 times, then the median RMSE value across all 100 runs was
recorded.

PARIX was an unbiased predictor of the proportion of polycyclic aromatic (PA) and
polyphenolic (PP) structures in DOM extracts comprising the global Isolate dataset, according to
molecular formulae measured using FT-ICR MS (Fig. 1a). Data are from Table 1 in Kellerman et
al. (17), representing diverse freshwater and marine samples, including samples from the Pacific
ocean at 21, 240 and 674 m. PARIX is calculated as the ratio of tabulated scores for PARAFAC
component C3 divided by C2. Equation 1 estimates the relative abundance of polyphenolic
compounds within 5% for samples in which these formulae comprised 2 - 45% of total formulas.

%(PA + PP) = 30.28 PARIX

……… Eq. 1

PARIX also predicted SUVA in the Isolate dataset (Fig. 1b) and in bulk EEMs from two
brackish river systems in the Florida Everglades (Fig 2a). PARIX in Fig 2a is calculated from
Table 2 in Timko et al. (29) as the ratio of scores for PARAFAC component C4 divided by C5,
which reveals a tight correlation with SUVA spanning both river systems (R2 = 0.96). These two
datasets demonstrate linearity between PARIX and relative aromaticity in bulk DOM and
extracts, independent of the specific PARAFAC model used to calculate PARIX.


In the diverse treated and untreated water samples comprising the SUEZ dataset, ARIX was an
unbiased predictor of the ratio of humic substance (HS) to building block (BB) fractions
determined by LC-OCD (Fig. 3, Eq. 2). While HS is understood to comprise high molecular
weight humic substances, the BB fraction represents lower molecular weight weathering and
oxidation products of humic substances (25).

HS

BB

= 6.1 ARIX

……… Eq. 2

The relationships in Eq. 1-2 are notable considering that FTIR-MS and LC-OCD characterise
all DOC fractions, including coloured and colourless molecules that do not fluoresce. Whether
aromatic molecules in the DOC pool exhibit fluorescence depends on their specific structures
and electronic properties. The ARIX numerator tracks a long-wavelength fluorescence
component identified repeatedly in PARAFAC analyses (17, 39) and usually attributed to
extensively π-conjugated polyaromatic structures (40). The denominator tracks a shortwavelength component with a secondary excitation maximum around 330 nm and emission peak
below 400 nm (16, 35). This is similar to several oxidised fluorophores consisting of a single
aromatic ring with attached carboxy, hydroxy, and methoxy groups, e.g. vanillic acid, syringic
acid, and acetovanillone (41) albeit with longer absorption, possibly indicating additional
substitution and/or the presence of a short, conjugated side chain, as in ferulic acid or coniferyl
alcohol, or a conjugated heterocycle, as in coumarin (5, 41, 42).

In individual datasets, ARIX and PARIX were reliable predictors of SUVA by linear
regression (Figure 2, Table S2). In the Everglades dataset representing two river systems
draining a tropical wetland, ARIX predicted SUVA more accurately than PARIX with RMSE =
0.21 m2g-1C. Low prediction errors (0.24-0.36 m2g-1C) were also observed for two high-latitude
datasets consisting of six rivers (Fig. 2d) and fifteen hydrologically isolated lakes (Fig. 2f) in the
Yukon basin, Alaska (26, 32). In the isolate dataset and in seven whole-water datasets, ARIX
and/or PARIX outperformed traditional fluorescence indices when predicting SUVA. Average
prediction errors (m2g-1C) in increasing order were: ARIX (0.39) < β/α = BIX (0.44) < HIX
(0.55) < FI (0.60) (Table S2 and Fig. S1-S4). Thus, although FI and HIX are the two
fluorescence indices used most frequently to predict DOM aromaticity, both were poorer
predictors of SUVA than ARIX and the “biological” indices.
In Fig. 1, ARIX predicted percent aromatic molecular formulas in DOM isolates, including in
extracts from 21 m and 240 m depths in the Pacific Ocean. For whole-water samples in the
Horsens dataset (30) correlations between ARIX and SUVA disintegrate in the bay (Fig. 2e).
Horsens river flows past relatively pristine sites in its upper reaches, then through an
agriculturally impacted landscape, and ultimately past a wastewater treatment plant near the
entrance to the bay. This progression is seen by decreasing SUVA and ARIX while moving
downstream. Bay sites had a marine character, with high salinities (32 ppt) and low SUVA (1.62.4) as is typical for marine samples (43). In the estuary, ARIX varied randomly and
independently from SUVA, indicating fluorescence intensities dropped below the limits for
quantifying ARIX.

Variations in water chemistry affect the prediction of relative aromaticity from fluorescence
ratios. Changes in pH affect some wavelengths more than others (39, 44), which could manifest
as different slope terms for datasets with different pH, or a lower coefficient of determination
(R2) if pH varies between samples. Fe(II) and Fe(III) cations interfere with SUVA due to light
absorption by aqueous iron complexes (45), and both species as well as several other metals (e.g.
Cu, Hg, Al) reduce fluorescence via quenching reactions (46). In the presence of quenching
metals, non-linearities would be expected to arise between SUVA and ARIX because A254
increases with increasing Fe concentration, whereas ARIX will decrease due to the preferential
quenching of long-wavelength fluorescence (47-49).
Overall, the regression slope terms (β1) for predicting SUVA from ARIX varied between
datasets, with the North American datasets having steeper slope terms than their European,
Australian, and African counterparts (Table S2). Comparing regressions equations for pairs of
datasets, β1 was not statistically different in Alaska Rivers (6.36 ± 0.41) vs. Yukon Lakes (7.03 ±
0.45) or SUEZ (5.8 ± 0.36), although the latter dataset is dominated by European samples (16,
26, 32). Also, β1 for Yukon Lakes was not statistically different to Everglades (8.01 ± 0.48).
Three datasets had lower slopes with β1 not significantly different to each other: Congo (3.71 ±
0.50), Horsens (Denmark) (4.05 ± 0.19), and S. America (4.51 ± 0.58) (28, 30, 31). The
Australia dataset (27) had considerable scatter and significantly lower β1 (2.08 ± 0.19).

The SUEZ and Isolates datasets each span several continents and multiple biomes yet produced
similar or higher R2 than several geographically restricted datasets. For the Isolate dataset,
fluorescence measurements were performed on extracted DOM, which probably limited

interfering matrix effects and improved signal/noise especially for marine DOM. However, the
SUEZ dataset was measured on whole-water EEMs and still indicates a single regression for
predicting SUVA from ARIX regardless of sample origin.
Plotting all eight whole-water datasets together (Fig. 4) showed ARIX to be confined within
the range 0.15-1.0, with most samples falling between 0.25 and 0.9. Except for Everglades, all
datasets were reasonably well captured by a single regression equation. Eq. 3 is derived from a
geometric (Model II) regression since ARIX and SUVA were measured on multiple instruments
(50) and has R2 = 0.48 and RMSE = 0.83 m2g-1C.

SUVA = 7.2 ARIX- 1.2

……… Eq. 3

Fig. 4 shows only bulk DOM datasets; the Isolate dataset was excluded due to the
unavailability of original fluorescence EEMs. However, after estimating the Isolate EEMs from
the published PARAFAC model (Fig. S4-6), the regression coefficients were not significantly
different to Eq. 3. For the Isolates dataset, the slope was 7.77 ± 0.57 with intercept -1.15 ± 0.33,
producing Eq. 4:

SUVA = 7.8 ARIX - 1.1

……… Eq. 4

Extending Weishaar’s equation linking 13C-NMR aromaticity to SUVA in DOM extracts (14):

Percent aromaticity = 6.52 SUVA+ 3.63 = 50.7 ARIX - 3.9

……… Eq. 5


Equations 1-4 support the hypothesis that a single slope factor links ARIX to SUVA across all
DOM whole-water samples and extracts. Even the Everglades dataset shows the same slope with
ARIX transposed by 0.3 units to the right. A right shift indicates a high background of colorless
DOC, also seen by Everglades having an unusually large intercept in the regression of DOC vs
absorbance (Section 3.4). Some of variability between datasets probably arises from artefacts; for
example, the instruments used to measure ARIX and SUVA varied between datasets/regions, as
did some protocols including whether samples were frozen prior to analysis.
Inter-laboratory comparison exercises often highlight biases arising from slightly different
procedures and analytical instruments, including for fluorescence spectroscopy (51), DOC and
SUVA (18), and FTIR-MS (52). SUVA measured by the USEPA method is the ratio of
measurements derived from a spectrophotometer and a carbon analyser, both with different
inherent sensitivities and biases, making it highly susceptible to both random and systematic
errors (18). In developing the USEPA standardized method for SUVA analysis, Potter and
Wimsatt (18) compared SUVA measured on duplicate samples using five different commercial
DOC analysers placed in the same laboratory. Despite these efforts to standardize measurement
conditions, and the use of a single spectrophotometer to measure absorbance in a 10-cm cell, a
high standard deviation (~0.3 m2g-1C) was observed across all measurements.
In the current study, a sensitivity analysis indicated that ~29% of variability in Fig. 4 can be
explained by purely random measurement errors under realistic assumptions about the precision
of fluorescence, absorbance, and DOC detectors (Fig. S7). Furthermore, since seven different
laboratories and 21 different detectors were used to derive Eq. 3, systematic biases related to
different instruments and measurement protocols are unavoidable. In datasets where SUVA was
measured using both the USEPA method and LC-OCD, stronger correlations were always


obtained with SUVALC. In the SUEZ dataset, biases could be traced to the absorbance detector
because DOC measured by LC-OCD was perfectly estimated by DOC measured using a carbon
analyzer (β1 = R2 = 1, RMSE = 0.01 mgL-1) yet SUVA was 11% lower than SUVALC (β1 = 0.89,
R2 = 0.85). In two other datasets, traditional SUVA correlated only weakly to SUVALC.
Individual datasets encompassing geographically diverse samples may provide more realistic
estimates of the variability to be expected when a single set of precise detectors is used to predict
SUVA from (P)ARIX across systems. For the SUEZ (whole-water) and Isolates (extract)
datasets, RMSE was 0.42-0.44 m2g-1C (Table S2).
3.4 Improving DOC predictions from absorbance measurements
Aquatic systems dominated by terrestrial DOM typically show tight correlations between
CDOM absorption and DOC, allowing DOC concentrations to be predicted from A254. However,
numerous studies show that these parameters diverge in concert with decreasing hydrologic
connectivity with the landscape (43, 53). Whereas terrestrial DOC is dominated by polyphenolic
and condensed aromatic compound classes (54), in-situ production combined with the
photodegradation of impounded DOM generates abundant unsaturated and phenolic molecular
compounds that may come to represent a significant portion of the DOC pool (26, 55). High
abundances of degraded aromatic structures result in the decoupling of A254 and DOC,
preventing the accurate prediction of DOC concentration from A254 (26, 53). This phenomenon is
extensively described and presents a significant hinder to predicting DOC concentrations from
optical measurements in ecological, biogeochemical and remote-sensing studies (43).
For all but a single dataset in this study (S. America), the correlation between DOC and A254
was significantly improved by adding a term to represent the interaction of A254 with ARIX (Eq.
6):

DOC = b0 + b1 A254 + b2 A254 ARIX

……… Eq. 6

Across the datasets, b0 coefficients were positive (0-2.9) and highest for Everglades, indicating
variable contributions by colorless DOC. The coefficient b1 was positive and spanned an order of
magnitude (15-120). The coefficient b2 ranged between small and large negative values (-6 to 123) indicating that the effect of A254 on DOC generally decreased as SUVA increased; Congo
was the sole exception with a small positive b2 value (Table S3). Everglades and Yukon Lakes
had very large b1 and b2 coefficients and by using Eq. 6 to predict DOC, RMSE decreased by
47% and 35% respectively relative to models with b2 = 0 (Fig. 5, Table S3). These results
indicate the potential to significantly improve DOC predictions from in situ spectroscopic
measurements particularly in aquatic systems with low hydrologic connectivity, as exemplified
by isolated boreal lakes (e.g. Yukon Lakes) and tropical wetlands (e.g. Everglades).

Equation 6 includes two terms reflecting different CDOM components, along with an intercept
representing non-coloured DOC. The first term (b1*A254) represents the contribution to DOC of
fresh terrestrial CDOM and is independent of aromaticity, indicating that for the molecules
comprising this pool, absorbance increases in proportion to the number of carbon atoms. The
second term (b2*A254*ARIX) and represents the contributions to DOC of terrestrial breakdown
products and autochthonous DOM. This term is generally negative and decreasing with
increasing aromaticity, because the conjugated polyphenolic structures represented by the ARIX
numerator are more efficient at absorbing light per carbon atom than the degraded phenolic
structures represented by the ARIX denominator. For terrestrially dominated ecosystems with
strong hydrologic connectivity only the first term is needed to predict DOC concentration with
reasonable accuracy, whereas to model optically complex waters including impounded
catchments with substantial in situ biogeochemical processing, both terms are required.
3.5 Benefits for water quality monitoring
Global surface waters face a changing climate with greater variability in both the quantity and
quality of DOM. Warmer temperatures are increasing rates of litter decomposition in soils and
rates of biological production in water at the same time as changes in land use and altered
rainfall patterns are changing hydrological regimes and the connectivity between landscapes and
DOM (56, 57). This affects correlations between DOC and spectroscopic measurements and
decreases the accuracy of predicting DOC concentrations from absorbance measurements
obtained in the laboratory or from remotely sensed imagery (58). Also due to the link between
aromaticity and chemical reactivity, any lack of predictability in surface water composition
negatively affects drinking water treatment by increasing the risk of chemical over- or
underdosing (16).

Algorithms developed in this study improve the prediction of DOC abundance and reactivity
from spectroscopic measurements which is especially important in waterbodies with high optical
complexity. New in situ spectroscopic instruments could leverage these results to deliver
currently missing data and provide real-time predictions of DOC abundance, reactivity and fate.
Such instruments could simplify ground-truthing of remote sensing algorithms and enhance
research on carbon cycling. Further applications include drinking water treatment, whereby realtime optical data could be used to adjust chemical doses in response to changing DOC
composition, facilitating the sustainable removal of DOC compounds and their associated
micropollutants.
