An Automated Parametrization Approach for
Coarse-Graining Soil Organic Matter Molecules
Lorenz F. Dettmann,† Oliver Kühn,† and Ashour A. Ahmed∗,†,‡
†University of Rostock, Institute of Physics, Albert-Einstein-Str. 23-24, D-18059 Rostock,
Germany.
‡Leibniz Institute for Catalysis (LIKAT), Albert-Einstein-Str. 29a, D-18059 Rostock,
Germany.
E-mail: ashour.ahmed@uni-rostock.de

Abstract
Investigating the molecular structure of soil organic matter (SOM), along with its intramolecular interactions and interactions with other soil components and xenobiotics, is
essential due to its ecological importance. However, the complexity and heterogeneity of
SOM present significant challenges for systematic studies. While experimental methods are
commonly employed, atomistic simulations provide a complementary approach to exploring
molecular-level processes. The Vienna Soil Organic Matter Modeler 2 (VSOMM2) facilitates the construction of molecular models of SOM systems with various compositions at the
atomistic scale, which can then be examined through molecular dynamics (MD) simulations.
This study introduces a parameterization strategy that enables the conversion of VSOMM2generated structures into a coarse-grained representation, thus allowing larger time and length
scales to be explored. By employing a conformer search technique, direct construction and
analysis of coarse-grained SOM models with diverse compositions were made possible, eliminating the need for atomistic MD simulations. To demonstrate this approach, coarse-grained
SOM models were created based on selected samples from the International Humic Substances
Society, considering different water content levels for each model. Comprehensive analyses,
including density and potential energy profile calculations, revealed a partial correlation with
the SOM compositions and demonstrated that electrostatic interactions govern the structural
packing. Moreover, a local phase separation process, particularly the formation of SOM voids,
was observed over several microseconds, underscoring the advantages of the coarse-graining
technique.

1

Introduction

The organic fraction, also known as Soil Organic Matter (SOM) is a diverse and complex mixture of organic substances, formed
through the interplay between various factors
such as plant and microbial inputs, the nature
of the parent material, and the climatic conditions 1,7,8 . Humic substances (HSs) are major
components of SOM formed from the decomposition of plant and microbial residues. They
are complex mixtures composed of numerous
molecules, many of which contain an aromatic

Soil is an important source of life on earth.
It provides a reservoir of plant nutrients and
contains the largest carbon pool that is biogeochemically active 1–3 . The functioning and
composition of terrestrial ecosystems, as well
as long-term climate regulation, are affected by
the soil. Leveraging the soil’s potential to mitigate climate change requires an understanding
of its geochemical processes 4–6 .

1
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-9llpf-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5933-5249 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY 4.0

nucleus with phenolic and carboxylic groups as
substituents 9 . HSs contain two main fractions:
humic acid (HA) and fulvic acid (FA), which
differ in their chemical composition, solubility,
molecular weight, color, and biological activity.
HA is a larger, darker, and less soluble molecular system that mainly enhances soil structure and water retention, while FA is a smaller,
lighter, and more soluble molecular system with
a higher concentration of carboxylic groups that
improves nutrient absorption and bioavailability 9 .
These compounds have been standardized by
the International Humic Substances Society
(IHSS) 10 . The IHSS furnishes standard HAs
and FAs from diverse sources. In addition, information is provided about the composition of
the samples, which includes the elemental composition, or the 13 C NMR Carbon distribution.
Along with advancements in experimental methods and research into soil science,
molecular-level simulations have become an
indispensable tool, driven by increasingly sophisticated numerical algorithms and improved
computer hardware 11 .
Molecular modeling
and simulations can offer valuable insights into
soil processes at the molecular level, including
molecular geometries and dynamics, thermodynamic and kinetic properties, and various
physical phenomena. Due to their complexity
and heterogeneity in chemical composition 12 ,
it is challenging to model SOM substances.
Various approaches and hypotheses have been
introduced to describe SOM via molecular simulations.
Schulten and colleagues developed a polymeric SOM model, based on bio- and geochemical, NMR-spectroscopic and mass spectrometric analyses 13–16 . It consisted of a network
of long-chain alkyl structures interspersed with
aromatic rings 17 . Subsequent refinements incorporated carbohydrate and protein units 14,18 .
It had the advantage of providing a multitude
of interaction sites and functionalities, to represent an average HS molecular structure. This
enabled the study of the adsorption of xenobiotic compounds onto HS 15,19,20 . However,
the idea that SOM is composed of high-weight
molecular species is now considered obsolete,

even though the models do not imply the existence of these specific structures 21–24 .
Another approach that has been employed
is the modeling of individual SOM functional
groups 25,26 . This reduces the complexity of
the systems, which in turn enables the application of more accurate methods, such as
those based on quantum mechanics. However, this approach could be compromised by
the number of functional groups that have
to be considered to sufficiently capture the
characteristics of SOM. Ahmed and colleagues
addressed this challenge by utilizing a large
test set comprising over 30 separate and distinct organic molecules that represent the
most common SOM functional groups. These
molecules were identified through extensive
characterization and analysis of numerous soil
samples using pyrolysis field-ionization mass
spectrometry (Py-FIMS) and x-ray absorption
near-edge spectroscopy (XANES) 27–33 . This
approach involved simulating various SOM
building blocks, including carbohydrates, phenols/lignin monomers, lignin dimers, lipids,
alkylaromatics, non-amide nitrogen-containing
compounds, amides, and sterols. It effectively
captured the binding/interactions between organic contaminants and SOM on three levels: individual SOM functional groups (small
organic molecules); SOM compound classes
(or building blocks); and SOM as a whole.
By applying quantum mechanical calculations
and quantitative structure-activity relationship
(QSAR) models, Ahmed and colleagues identified key parameters driving the specific binding mechanism. Overall, this molecular modeling approach showed good agreement with experimental results and provided insights into
molecular-level interactions that are beyond the
reach of current experimental methods.
An alternative approach based on the experimental characterization of HS is the Vienna
Soil Organic Matter Modeler (VSOMM), introduced by Sündermann et al. 34 . It assumes
that HS is composed of a mixture of smaller
molecules (such as those previously introduced
by Ahmed et al.) that are mainly held together by dispersion and electrostatic forces,
with covalent bonds playing a minor role 35–39 .
2

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-9llpf-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5933-5249 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY 4.0

The VSOMM generates atomistic models of
SOM composed of HS molecules, which are constructed from a fragment database, matching
the elemental composition and fractions of certain functional groups. This enables the investigation of HS structures that are versatile
in composition. Together with the release of a
second version 6 , which included optimizations
such as an improved algorithm for matching the
organic composition to the input parameters,
this has made it possible to carry out numerous
investigations to better understand HSs 24,40–45 .
Simulations of complex and relatively large
systems, which are often necessary for modeling SOM, often require considerable computing
resources. One approach that can be used to
speed up molecular simulations is the so-called
coarse-graining technique 46 , whereby several
atoms or even entire molecules are grouped into
new particles, often known as beads. This reduces the number of particles and interactions
that need to be evaluated, which improves performance. The coarse-graining technique inherently involves a trade-off, as it results in a loss of
atomistic detail. However, this limitation is not
a significant drawback when applied to SOM
molecules, as their precise structural details are
largely unknown. Different coarse-grained force
fields exist 47–49 , including the widely used Martini force field 50 .
Several approaches have been used to achieve
a coarse-grained representation of VSOMM
models. Dissipative particle dynamics was used
to simulate models from the initial version of
the Modeler 51 . Recently, Xue et al. 52 used
the Martini force field to convert a set of HS
molecules from the VSOMM2 into a coarsegrained representation. They investigated the
dynamics and interactions of the molecules
with lipids, peptides, carbohydrates, and lignin.
We have developed a coarse-grained VSOMM2
model by utilizing the recently released Martini 3 version 53 , by coarse-graining the entire
fragment database 54 . This enabled the generation and investigation of different HS structures
based on a general conversion scheme.
While the coarse-graining approach used in
our previous work improved the simulation of
the HS molecules, the parametrization of the

bonded interactions relied on atomistic simulations of the reference systems, which could
be computationally expensive. This approach
may become less efficient when different compositions of SOM need to be investigated, as
it would require atomistic simulations for each
reference system. Readily available coarsegrained SOM models could facilitate long-term
and large-scale simulations of SOM systems of
different compositions, which would be advantageous, for example, in the investigation of adsorption processes.
Therefore, this study aims to build on the
approach used in our recent work 54 by introducing an improved parameterization protocol. Instead of using atomistic simulations
of SOM structures of VSOMM2 for the parameterization of the bonded interactions, we
employ a conformer generation method known
as Experimental-Torsion Basic Knowledge Distance Geometry (ETKDG) 55 . Our new parameterization approach was benchmarked by
constructing coarse-grained SOM systems representing various abundant HSs with compositions characterized by differing degrees of acidity, aromaticity, and common functional groups
found in soils, thereby reflecting a general and
realistic SOM. The rationale behind selecting
these SOM systems is to capture the diversity
and complexity of natural SOM, by providing
realistic models that mimic its behavior under different environmental conditions. Simulations for each molecular model system with
a specific chemical composition were conducted
with varying levels of water content, enabling
the evaluation of corresponding density and energetic properties and providing insights into
molecular-level interactions and processes that
occur in soil environments.

2

Methods

2.1

Parametrization Approach

We recently introduced SOM models that are
compatible with the Martini 3 force field 54 .
These models were derived from structures generated by the VSOMM2, which constructs SOM

3
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-9llpf-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5933-5249 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY 4.0

structures using a set of fragment molecules 6,54 .
The parametrization approach utilized SwarmCG 56 to optimize the bonded interaction parameters of the isolated fragments and to generate the corresponding coarse-grained structures.
These fragments were then assembled into larger macromolecules1 , using potential energy parameters for the connection between fragments, determined through the direct
Boltzmann inversion (DBI) method.
While this work presents a robust pipeline
for constructing coarse-grained SOM models
with arbitrary compositions, the DBI-based
parametrization requires MD simulations of the
respective atomistic SOM reference systems.
Conducting these reference simulations for each
case can be time-consuming, especially when investigating coarse-grained SOM systems with
varying compositions. Furthermore, the previous investigation demonstrated that a time
step of 10 fs is necessary to maintain the stability of the equations of motion of the systems.
Although the coarse-grained representation has
already extended simulation times, further optimizing the interaction parameters to allow for
a larger time step could significantly enhance
performance.
To address the issues mentioned above, we
implemented two major modifications to our
previous parametrization approach 54 . First, to
improve numerical stability, the individual fragments were reparametrized using Swarm-CG,
restricting the maximum value for the angle
force constants to 350 kJ mol−1 rad−2 . For further details about the reparametrization, please
refer to Section S1 of the Supporting Information. As will be demonstrated later, this modification effectively reduces high-frequency components in the vibrational power spectra of the
fragments, indicating a reduction in high force
gradients. This, in turn, enabled the use of a
time step of 20 fs for the integration of the equations of motion for the SOM systems.
Second, to construct coarse-grained models
independently of atomistic MD simulations,

equilibrium distances and angles were determined using the conformer search method,
specifically the ETKDG approach 55 . This approach has been used for the parametrization of
Martini models in the work of Potter et al. 57 ,58 .
For further information about the ETKDG approach, please refer to Section S2 of the Supporting Information. The main advantage of
using this method is its ability to provide interaction parameters between different fragments
much faster than performing MD simulations.
The workflow of the modified parametrization approach is illustrated in Figure 1. This
procedure has been implemented into a Python
tool, which is available on Zenodo 59 .Using this
tool, topology files obtained from the VSOMM2
can be directly converted into those for the
coarse-grained structures, using a parametrization step. As a result, there is no need to perform or prepare reference simulations, as the
parameterization can be carried out via a single command from the user.
To benchmark the modified parametrization
approach, the following analyses were conducted. First, the vibrational power spectra for the fragments were calculated with
the GROMACS tool gmx velacc. These spectra were calculated using both parameterization approaches: the previous one described
above 54 , and the current modified approach
with restricted force constants. Moreover, the
influence of the reparametrization on the agreement between the atomistic and coarse-grained
distributions was assessed using a mismatch
score derived from the Swarm-CG tool. Finally, the optimal number of conformers needed
to achieve sufficient convergence of equilibrium
distances and angles was determined.

2.2

Simulation of SOM Compositions

The chemical heterogeneity of SOM is one of
its characteristic features. To explore this diversity, SOM systems with five different compositions were investigated. Escalona et al. 45
analyzed and sorted HSs from the International
Humic Substances Society (IHSS) via a principal component (PC) analysis, using aromaticity

1

The term “macromolecule” refers to molecules composed of multiple fragments. It should not be confused
with the polymeric SOM model introduced by Schulten
and colleagues.

4
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-9llpf-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5933-5249 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY 4.0

and acidity as PCs (please refer to Figure 1 in
their paper). Following this categorization, certain HS types, including humic acid (HA) and
fulvic acid (FA), were investigated to represent
characteristic compositions within the chemical space (see Table 1). For more information
about the different SOM types, please see Table
S1 in the Supporting Information, which provides the elemental and organic fractions of the
SOM systems. In addition, Figures S2 and S3
provide detailed insights into the heterogeneity
and distribution of fragments within the SOM
compositions.
The atomistic structures were generated using the VSOMM2, wherein each SOM model
system comprised 1600 fragments in total, with
each macromolecule consisting of 5 connected
fragments. The pH was maintained at 5, and
calcium ions were introduced to achieve charge
neutrality. The water content was varied for
each SOM model system (please refer to Table S2 in the Supporting Information). To
ensure consistency with previous studies, the
water content is reported as the heavy atom
fraction of water, xwater , determined from the
corresponding atomistic system. These structures were subsequently converted into coarsegrained models using our newly developed tool.
As the SOM composition remains constant
across different water contents for each SOM
type (model system), the parameterization procedure only needs to be performed once (i.e., for
a single water content). The resulting topology files can then be used for the cases with
other levels of water content. Additionally, the
new tool allows to produce the mapped coarsegrained structure without the need for the parameterization step. These mapped structures
were generated using the center of geometry
mapping and subsequently solvated with gmx
solvate.
Following the coarse-grained MD simulations,
detailed analyses of the structures’ properties
were carried out. In particular, densities and
potential energies were calculated, using the
GROMACS tool gmx energy. Furthermore, a
phase separation process was investigated and
evaluated using partial densities, which were
determined utilizing the gmx density tool.

Figure 1: Graphical illustration of the modified parameterization approach. The tool that
was developed reads the atomistic topology
files. Subsequently, equilibrium values are determined using the conformer search (ETKDG)
and augmented with values obtained from
the Swarm-CG parameterization. Finally, the
coarse-grained topology files are output with
the mapped structure, which can subsequently
be solvated in water.

5
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-9llpf-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5933-5249 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY 4.0

Table 1: HS samples from the IHSS, which are modeled and analyzed in this work.

2.3

Identifier

HS sample

Characteristics

SOM I
SOM II
SOM III
SOM IV
SOM V

Elliot Soil I (FA)
high carboxyl and carbonyl content
Elliot Soil IV (HA)
low carboxyl and carbonyl content
Leonardite (HA)
high aromatic content
Pahokee Peat II (FA)
intermediate carboxyl and aromatic content
Suwannee River II (FA) high hetero-aliphatic & aliphatic content

Computational Details

The MD simulations were performed using the GROMACS simulation package
version 2019.4 60 .
Python3 packages, in61
cluding NumPy , Matplotlib 62 , MDAnalyis 63,64 , RDKit (https://www.rdkit.org),
and IPython 65 , were employed to generate the
coarse-grained topology files and structures.
The VMD software was used for visualization 66 .
Each SOM model system was first relaxed
utilizing an energy minimization. An NPT
equilibration was then carried out, which was
followed by the production run. The equilibration time was set to 10 ns. The production run lasted 20 µs, where the last 3 µs were
used for the analysis of densities and potential energies. The leap-frog integrator was applied, using a time step of 20 fs for all MD
simulations. The temperature was held constant at T = 298.15 K, using the velocityrescale thermostat 67 with a coupling constant
of τT = 1 ps. For the NPT equilibration, the
Berendsen barostat 68 with a coupling constant
of τp = 8 ps was applied, whereas the ParrinelloRahman barostat 69 with a coupling constant
of 12 ps was utilized for the production run.
The reference pressure was set to 1 bar. For
the Lennard-Jones interactions, the Verlet cutoff scheme with a straight cutoff of 1.1 nm was
used. Reaction-field electrostatics were utilized
to evaluate the Coulomb interactions. A cut-off
of 1.1 nm with a dielectric constant of ϵr = 15
was applied. Constraints were incorporated by
employing the LINCS algorithm. All simulations were conducted using periodic boundary
conditions.
As a reference for the Swarm-CG reparametrization, the atomistic simulation setup from our

previous study 54 was used, where isolated
atomistic fragments were solvated in water and
simulated for 25 ns. The GROMOS force field
version 54A7 70,71 was applied in the unitedatom representation, following the description
of the VSOMM2 atomistic models. Moreover, the identical setup for the Swarm-CG
parametrization was employed, encompassing
the simulation of the coarse-grained fragments
that were solvated in water. One difference to
the parametrization from our previous study is
that the angle force constants were restricted,
as described above. For further computational
details about the atomistic simulations and
the Swarm-CG parametrization, please refer
to Dettmann et al. 54 , Section 2.3.1 and 2.3.3,
respectively.
Regarding the parameterization of the equilibrium distances and angles of the macromolecules using ETKDG, 1000 conformers per
molecule were generated. This number was sufficient to achieve convergence of the distance
and angle values, as discussed in Section 3.1.2.

3

Results and Discussion

This section is organized into three subsections
that address the benchmarking of the modified parameterization approach (Section 3.1);
the development of coarse-grained SOM systems with varying compositions (Section 3.2);
and the evaluation of numerical performance
(Section 3.3). The first subsection provides an
analysis of the revised force constants for the
SOM fragment molecules (Section 3.1.1) and
details of the ETKDG approach (Section 3.1.2).

6
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-9llpf-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5933-5249 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY 4.0

3.1

Benchmarking the Modified
Parametrization Approach

3.1.1

Revised Force Constants

likely due to its inherently low force constants
being unaffected by the restriction.
It should be noted that the dashed line in Figure 2 represents the maximum frequency that
can be resolved with a time step of 20 fs. With
the revised force constants, all fragment frequencies fall below this limit, indicating that
the equations of motion can be effectively integrated with the larger time step. The final force
constants can be found in the Python script
used to create coarse-grained SOM structures
(available in the Zenodo repository 59 ). From
a general perspective, the choice of the time
step influences the accuracy of the integrator
(in this case, the second-order leap-frog algorithm) and directly impacts the conservation of
key quantities such as energy, temperature, and
pressure 72 . A detailed investigation into the potential effects of further increasing the time step
on these quantities could be considered a topic
for future research.
We also determined the parameters of the
bonded interactions for the set of fragments
using the recently released “Bartender” tool 73
which employs MD simulations at the semiempirical quantum mechanical level of theory as
a reference. However, this approach resulted
in even higher force constants than those obtained from the previous parametrization using
Swarm-CG. This finding is consistent with the
work of Pereira et al. 73 , which demonstrated
that the molecules described using semiempirical quantum mechanics are usually more rigid
than those described by atomistic force fields.
In certain cases, the force constants would also
need to be manually scaled down, which would
probably result in a similar parameter set.
The limitation of force constants results in a
narrower range of feasible solutions for the optimal parameters. In Swarm-CG, the match
between coarse-grained and atomistic distributions is evaluated via the so-called Earth
Mover’s distance (EMD) 74 . The similarity of
the distributions can serve as an indicator of
how accurately the coarse-grained model reproduces the dynamics of the grouped (mapped)
atoms. In other words, a closer alignment between the two distributions corresponds to a
smaller EMD value (for details about the EMD,

Figure 2: Power spectra of the velocity autocorrelation function for HS3 and HS30 fragments, obtained using the previous (prev.)
parametrization approach (blue and orange)
and the current restricted parametrization approach employed in this work (green and red).
The colored groups of fragment molecules HS3
and HS30 represent their bead assignment.
The revision of the force constants of the SOM
fragment molecules from our previous work 54
aimed to enable a larger time step in the integration of the equations of motion. Our previous findings suggested that high vibrational frequencies could compromise the numerical stability of simulations. To illustrate this point,
we calculated the vibrational power spectra for
two SOM fragments, HS3 and HS30, using the
revised force constants and compared them to
power spectra obtained with the parameters
from our previous parameter set (see Figure 2).
The fragment numbering follows the VSOMM2
database. HS30, known for its high frequencies, was a primary contributor to simulation
crashes. The adjusted force constants caused a
significant spectral shift in HS30, with the most
intense peak moving from around 400 cm−1 (orange) to approximately 200 cm−1 (red), accompanied by a notable reduction in intensity. Conversely, HS3 displayed no significant changes,
7

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-9llpf-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5933-5249 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY 4.0

bution to the reference for the restricted model,
as observed in Figure 3 (c). This behavior is
also evident in other angular distributions of
this fragment (see Figure S4). Due to the restriction of the angle force constants, the model
does not fully reproduce the reference distribution. However, the deviation remains moderate,
and the mean value is accurately captured.
Swarm-CG employs a sequential optimization approach by conducting multiple coarsegrained simulations to match the distributions
of the coarse-grained molecules to the reference. The optimal solution is identified within a
multidimensional solution space using the particle swarm algorithm. This means that the solution obtained by Swarm-CG may vary with
each calculation, even under identical conditions. Therefore, attention should be directed
toward systematic changes in the distributions
rather than minor deviations.
In general, the stronger restriction of the angular force constants can be expected to result
in a lower degree of accuracy in describing the
angular interactions. This illustrates the compromise that must be made to improve the numerical stability and thus the performance of
the models. However, the extent of the accuracy loss depends on the nature of the particular angular potentials, and is therefore assumed
to be different for different fragments, as suggested by Figure 3.
To quantitatively investigate the impact of
the restricted parameterization, the total mismatch score (TMS) of the individual fragments
for the previous and current models was compared (see Figure 4). The TMS of a fragment
is calculated from the individual EMDs of each
bonded term, including bonds, angles, and dihedral angles. For further details about the
TMS calculation, please refer to Section S5 in
the Supporting Information.
The individual score components of the TMS
are not normalized by the number of bonded
interactions; therefore, TMS values should only
be compared for the same molecule and under the same definition of bonded interactions.
Consequently, when interpreting Figure 4, attention should be paid to the position of each
point rather than comparing different points. A

Figure 3: Comparison of the angle distributions
of mapped (red) and coarse-grained (blue) models. The distributions of the angle between the
beads 2, 4 and 3 (2-4-3) of the HS3 fragment
are shown for the restricted parametrization (a)
and previous parametrization (b). Similarly,
the angle distributions of the 3-4-1 angle of the
HS30 fragment are shown in (c) and (d). The
molecules with the bead indices are shown in
Figure 2.
please refer to Section S5 in the Supporting Information).
To ascertain the potential impact of the restricted parametrization on accuracy, we compared the agreement of the bonded distributions of the fragments from our previous parameterization approach 54 with those of the present
work. Figure 3 illustrates the angular distributions of a specific angle of the HS3 and HS30
fragments, respectively, for both approaches.
In each diagram, the distribution of the optimized coarse-grained model is compared with
the mapped reference. The complete set of distributions for these two fragments is given in
the Supporting Information, Figure S4.
No significant difference is observed for the
HS3 fragment when comparing the two approaches, as shown in Figure 3 (a) and (b). This
is consistent with the results obtained from the
power spectrum calculation, which also showed
no significant change for the HS3 fragment. In
contrast, the HS30 fragment exhibits a deviation in the match of the coarse-grained distri-

8
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-9llpf-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5933-5249 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY 4.0

Figure 4: Comparison of the total mismatch
scores (TMSs) of the fragments from the
Swarm-CG parametrization. The values from
the previous parameterization (x-axis) are plotted against those from the modified parameterization in this study (y-axis). Each point represents a comparison of the two EMD values for
a specific fragment.

Figure 5: Convergence of the bond values for
the “SOM III” model system as a function of
the number of conformers. The plot depicts the
relative deviation from the mean value, averaged across all bonded terms within the model
system.
Further details can be found in the Supporting
Information, Section S2.
Figure 5 illustrates an average convergence
behavior for the ”SOM III” model system. For
a more detailed explanation with additional illustrations, please refer to the Supporting Information (Figure S5). The convergence behavior results in a relatively low deviation for a
high number of conformers. For example, the
relative deviation from the mean for 1000 conformers averaged over all bonds in the system
is around 1 ‰ (0.001). Overall, the data points
follow
√ a convergence behavior proportional to
1/ n. The angle values (please see Figure S6
in the Supporting Information) show slightly
higher deviations, which can be attributed to
the associated higher number of degrees of freedom compared to the bonds. Based on this
analysis, it is concluded that 1000 conformers
are sufficient. This number was utilized for the
parametrization of all the other SOM systems,
which is discussed in Section 3.2.
Potter et al. 57 conducted a similar investigation for a dodecane molecule, focusing on how
average bond lengths and angles vary with the
number of conformers. Given the possible heterogeneity of bonded interactions in the SOM
systems and the multiple options for construct-

higher position in the upper half of the graph
indicates a larger TMS value for the restricted
parameterization compared to the previous one,
which suggests that restricting the force constants results in a less accurate reproduction
of the distributions. Most TMS values remain
almost unchanged, implying that the current
model retains a similar level of accuracy in reproducing bonded distributions as the previous
model.
3.1.2

ETKDG Approach

The conformer search approach is capable
of providing structural information about
molecules relatively quickly, which is the motivation for its use in the modified parametrization approach. Equilibrium distances and angles are determined by mapping the individual
conformers. The mapped representation is then
averaged over the entire set of configurations
to obtain the equilibrium values. However,
the accuracy of the calculation is affected by
the number of conformers included. Therefore,
it was necessary to determine the number of
conformers required to ensure sufficient convergence of the average bond and angle values.
9

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-9llpf-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5933-5249 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY 4.0

ing the models, the convergence behavior may
be contingent on the particular system considered. For example, the number of bonded terms
present within a particular macromolecule and,
therefore, its number of fragments, could influence the results. Thus, an investigation of this
nature should be revisited, when altering the
number of fragments per macromolecule.
As shown, it is possible to determine the equilibrium values of bonds and angles by averaging
over different conformers generated by ETKDG
for all bonded interactions within one molecule.
The parametrization based on Swarm-CG provides these values solely for the bonded interactions within individual fragments, as not
every macromolecule can be sampled through
MD simulations in an appropriate timeframe.
Hence, the subsequent approach was employed
to combine these two sets of parameters. The
equilibrium values of bonds and angles, as well
as dihedral angles are taken from ETKDG, to
prevent a mixing of these values with those from
Swarm-CG. The force constants obtained from
Swarm-CG are employed for the bonded interactions within the fragments, whereas standard
force constants are utilized for the interactions
between different fragments. A comparison of
the equilibrium values generated by Swarm-CG
and ETKDG can be found in Section S6 of the
Supporting Information.

3.2

Figure 6: Average of system densities for the
SOM types calculated for different water contents xwater in the systems; error bars denote
standard deviations.
systems tend to underestimate the density, especially for lower water contents, due to the
calcium ions having fixed bead sizes. This
results in the coarse-grained model being unable to form distinct calcium-carboxylate complexes. In particular, the so-called bidentate
complexes, which contribute to a tight packing at lower water contents, cannot be reproduced by the coarse-grained model, which leads
to an underestimation of the density for these
cases. However, for Leonardite (HA), the deviations were still acceptable (maximum of around
10 %). The use of smaller-sized water beads
(tiny water) facilitated a denser packing of the
SOM molecules, thereby reducing the discrepancy between atomistic and coarse-grained densities. Nonetheless, at lower water concentrations, this discrepancy remained significant,
emphasizing the critical influence of calciumcarboxylate complexes on the system’s density.
By comparing the different compositions, the
densities can potentially be related to the abundance of certain functional groups, such as carboxylate groups. As mentioned previously, the
interaction between these groups and calcium
ions contributes to the SOM packing, which is
especially important at lower water contents.
In the case of the SOM systems with a similar aromatic content that were investigated, the
densities are higher for the compositions with a

SOM Systems with Different
Compositions

The densities yield information about the compactification behavior of SOM. The five different compositions of SOM presented in Table 1
were simulated. The system densities, respectively averaged over the last 3 µs of the production runs and calculated for the different levels of water contents in the system, denoted
by xwater , are shown in Figure 6. Please note
that due to the utilization of Martini standard
masses, the densities were rescaled, using the
ratio of the mass of the respective atomistic to
that of the coarse-grained system.
The overall trends for the densities of the different SOM types are similar. As discussed
previously 54 , coarse-grained Leonardite (HA)
10

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-9llpf-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5933-5249 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY 4.0

higher acidity. From high to low acidity, the
respective SOM types are: SOM I (blue), SOM
IV (red) and SOM II (orange). Therefore, this
could again be explained by the higher number
of available carboxylate-calcium complexes that
might contribute to structures that are denser
in overall. This behavior has also been observed
in studies investigating humic substances using
atomistic simulations 45 . Consequently, this is a
feature that can be reproduced with the coarsegrained model as well.
Due to the associated computational efforts, simulations of atomistic structures were
not considered in the present study. Especially, considering the system sizes (320 macromolecules each) and the equilibration time of
such structures, particularly at lower water contents 45,54 , modeling at an atomistic resolution
becomes unfeasible. The relatively high number of molecules was used to achieve a higher
degree of heterogeneity, reflecting an important
property of SOM. However, given the size of the
systems and the simulation of several microseconds, the densities could be obtained relatively
easily using the coarse-grained approach.
To measure the strengths of the interaction
types in the system, the potential energy was
normalized with the total number of beads in
the system. The different parts of the total potential energy were calculated, which includes
the potentials of bonded and non-bonded interactions. It should be noted that for each potential type, the same number of beads for the
respective SOM type was used for the total potential energy so that the individual potential
types can be regarded as a true division of the
total potential energy.
Concerning the total potential energy in Figure 7 (a), a relatively constant value for lower
water contents is visible. The energy values become less negative with increasing water content. Thus, the potential energy has
the minimum value, when the SOM systems are
more compact, namely at lower water contents.
Based on the aforementioned considerations regarding the stability of SOM structures, it is
assumed that the non-bonded interactions, and
especially the Coulomb interactions are responsible for the lower potential energy. To verify

this, the potential energy was subdivided into
its individual components.
The potential energies of the bonded terms,
namely bonds (Figure 7 (b)), angles (Figure
7 (c)), and improper dihedral angles (Figure 7
(d)) follow a similar trend. The higher potential energies at lower water contents could be
explained by the bonded terms of the molecules
being in a less energetically preferable configuration compared to other water contents, due
to their tighter packing. These trends are opposite to those for the total potential energy,
which are, however, not noticeably affected, as
the fraction of potential energies of the bonded
terms is relatively small.
The non-bonded interactions are primarily
described by the Lennard-Jones potentials in
the Martini force field. Usually, partial charges
are not applied to the beads, in contrast to the
atoms used in atomistic simulations. Because
of this, the Lennard-Jones interactions in Figure 7 (e) account for a significant proportion
of the total potential energy and follow a very
similar trend, except for slightly higher values
at lower water contents. From the perspective
of this interaction type, the system is in an energetically preferable state when water contents
are around xwater = 0.3 or higher, depending on
the SOM type.
The reason why the total potential energy is
relatively constant at lower water contents is
the negative contribution of the Coulomb energies (Figure 7 (f)), which is also evident from
the sum of the Lennard-Jones and Coulomb
energies (Figure S7 in the Supporting Information). The lower water content enables
a stronger interaction between the ions and
the charged carboxylate groups, leading to a
stronger Coulomb energy. The curves of the
Coulomb energies are consistent with the notion that the Coulomb interaction is the driving
force behind the compactification of the systems. These interactions are unique in that
their strength increases as water content decreases. This phenomenon can be understood
as a dilution or shielding effect: as the water
content rises, the shielding by water molecules
increases, and conversely, it decreases with
lower water content. Furthermore, it is pos11

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-9llpf-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5933-5249 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY 4.0

Figure 7: Time averaged total potential energies (a), and potential energies of bonded ((b)-(d))
and non-bonded interactions ((e)-(f)) for the different SOM models; error bars denote standard
deviations. Please note the different scales of the y-axes.

12
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-9llpf-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5933-5249 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY 4.0

sible to establish a link between the Coulomb
interaction strength and the acidity of different SOM types, as already assumed in the discussion about the densities. A higher acidity
implies a larger number of charged carboxylate
groups in the system, which contribute to the
Coulomb potential. For example, SOM I (high
acidity) has the strongest Coulomb interaction,
whereas the opposite is true for SOM II (low
acidity).
Interestingly, the curves for the total potential energy and the Lennard-Jones potential energies follow the same order as those of the
Coulomb potential energies.
To obtain further information and also to analyze the behavior of the Lennard-Jones energies, these were subdivided into their individual
components, as shown in Figure 8. The subdivision of the Coulomb interactions can be seen
in Figure S8 of the Supporting Information.
The characteristic order of the different curves
is most apparent in the HS-calcium (HS-CA)
in (Figure 8 (c)) and water-calcium (W-CA)
Lennard-Jones interactions (Figure 8 (e)). This
is reasonable because the same order was observed in the Coulomb interactions, where the
calcium ions were involved, and they are also
involved in these two types of interaction. Furthermore, it is evident that the Lennard-Jones
interactions between the calcium ions and the
rest of the system account for a significant proportion of the total Lennard-Jones potential energy.
The curves of the HS-HS (Figure 8 (a)) and
HS-CA (Figure 8 (c)) interactions exhibit a similar trend, that is, the interaction strength decreases as the water content increases. The opposite trend was observed for the W-W case
(Figure 8 (d)). These trends can be explained
by the increasing number of water molecules in
the system with increasing xwater . As the water concentration increases, the HS molecules
and calcium ions become more solvated, which
increases the contact area and consequently
the interaction with water. The replacement
of more interaction sites with water results
in a decrease in the number of HS molecules
interacting with calcium and among themselves, thereby reducing the strength of the

Lennard-Jones interactions. In the W-W case,
a higher water concentration results in more water molecules interacting with each other, which
leads to a decrease in the corresponding potential energy.
HS-W (Figure 8 (b)) and W-CA LennardJones interactions (Figure 8 (e)) follow a similar
trend, whereby the potential energy decreases
first with increasing water content. After reaching an extremum at around xwater = 0.4, the
energies increase again. This can be explained
in a similar way. The presence of more water
beads in the system results in an increased interaction strength with the calcium ions and
HS molecules. However, when a certain concentration is reached, the number of interaction sites becomes saturated, which leads to a
weaker increase in the interaction. Keeping in
mind that the per bead Lennard-Jones potential energies are taken into consideration, the
number of beads in the system Nbeads increases
with higher water concentrations, leading to an
increase in the per bead potential energies. This
saturation effect is also evident in the LennardJones interaction energies, which were not normalized by the number of beads (please refer to
Figure S9 in the Supporting Information).
Escalona et al. 43 studied Leonardite (HA)
models from the VSOMM2 using atomistic simulations, and calculated the solvation free energy of water molecules for different water contents in the Leonardite (HA) systems. They observed that the solvation energy increased until xwater = 0.17, when the system reached a
fully hydrated state. The free energy remained
constant at the free energy of inserting a single water molecule into bulk water until it increased again when it reached xwater = 0.43.
This indicated that a phase separation between
HS molecules and water had begun.
Although the free energy also contains entropic information, an analogy can be made
with the Lennard-Jones potential energies from
this study. As mentioned above, the weakening of the Lennard-Jones energies for the HSW and W-CA cases suggests that more water
molecules start interacting with each other than
with HS molecules or calcium ions. The point
at which the per bead potential energies are
13

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-9llpf-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5933-5249 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY 4.0

Figure 8: Time averaged Lennard-Jones potential energies for the different pairs of interactions
between HS molecules, water (W) and calcium (CA); error bars denote standard deviations.
strongest, indicating that the interaction sites
are saturated with water, is comparable to the
xwater value obtained by Escalona et al. 43 , at
which phase separation occurs. However, the
Lennard-Jones potential energies alone do not
provide sufficient information about whether or
not a phase separation occurred.
In this regard, the formation of larger regions
filled with water was observed, which can be
interpreted as a local phase separation between
SOM and water, particularly evident for SOM
II at the highest water content. The phase separation process is depicted quantitatively in Figure 9. It shows the overlap between the normalized partial densities of the HS molecules
and water as a function of the simulation time
of the production part of the trajectory. For
additional information on the overlap calculation, please refer to Section S7 in the Supporting Information. In addition, Figure 10 presents
two snapshots of the trajectory of the aforementioned system, one at the beginning of the
production run (a) and one at the end (b).

Figure 9: Overlap between normalized partial
densities of HS and water over simulation time,
in y-direction. SOM II with the highest water content is considered. Please note that the
exponential fit was applied to obtain the average value, which the partial density oscillates
around.

14
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-9llpf-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5933-5249 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY 4.0

Figure 10: Snapshots from the trajectory of SOM II with the highest water content, at 0 µs (a)
and after 20 µs (b). HS (brown), water (cyan) and calcium (green) are depicted. Each snapshot is
shown with and without water, respectively.
Figure 9 shows that the overlap is decreasing
exponentially, approaching a value of around
0.721. This indicates that the initially more
mixed structure, with a greater overlap between
partial densities, gradually becomes less mixed,
resulting in a lower overlap. The strength of the
demixing can be further quantified using the parameters of the exponential fits. These can be
found in Table S3 of the Supporting Information. For the other SOM systems at the highest
water concentration, the overlap is exclusively
less than one but higher than for SOM II. A
certain amount of demixing is to be expected,
as the structures formed by the HS molecules
will not result in an ideal mixture.
A possible explanation for, why this system,
in particular, shows a clear phase separation is,
first, that the high water content provides sufficient water molecules in the system to facilitate
the formation of a distinct water phase. Second,
SOM II is distinguished by its low acidity, which
may be attributed to the particular hydrophobicity of the HS molecules, in contrast to the
other SOM types. This could contribute to the
formation of a separate phase in a hydrophilic
solvent, such as water. Additionally, the accessible time scales are within the microsecond
range, which supports the observation of such
processes.

Figure 11: Performance calculations for SOM
III with the highest water content, comparing atomistic and coarse-grained representation. The ratio of coarse-grained to atomistic
performance is shown in (a). The speedup for
different OMP Threads is depicted in (b).

15
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-9llpf-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5933-5249 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY 4.0

3.3

Numerical Performance

ulations. Second, for the system under consideration, each coarse-grained bead represents,
on average, approximately seven atoms, including hydrogens. This reduction in the number
of particles (N ) decreases the computational
complexity, leading to a performance improvement by a factor of approximately 49, assuming
the O(N 2 ) scaling of classical MD simulations.
When combined with the tenfold increase in
timestep, the total theoretical performance improvement is around a factor of 490. It is important to note, however, that performance scaling
often improves slightly better than N 2 due to
algorithmic optimizations, which accounts for
the slightly lower performance improvement observed in this study. As demonstrated by this
and by the simulations presented in this paper,
the utilization of these SOM models for longtime simulations can be accomplished with reasonable effort. This enables the investigation
of diverse adsorption processes on longer time
scales as well as the interactions between biomacromolecules and SOM.

To assess the improvement in numerical performance, measured as the length of trajectory
produced within a given computational time,
benchmarking simulations were performed using both atomistic and coarse-grained approaches.
The performance ratio between
coarse-grained and atomistic models, Pcg /Pat
(Figure 11 (a)), was therefore calculated, along
with the speedup of the corresponding systems
(Figure 11 (b)). The speedup is defined as the
ratio of serial to parallel runtime.
In this case, SOM III with the highest water content was considered. The performance,
depending on the number of OpenMP (OMP)
threads, is shown for the atomistic and coarsegrained systems in the Supporting Information,
Figure S12, including additional information regarding the benchmark.
In Figure 11 (a), it can be seen that the performance improvement reduces as the number
of OMP threads rises. This behavior can be
elucidated through the speedup values in Figure 11 (b), whereby the atomistic system exhibits a higher speedup compared to the coarsegrained one, which is particularly evident with
a higher number of threads. This indicates that
the coarse-grained system is less efficiently parallelizable through OMP parallelization, leading to a lower enhancement in performance for
more threads. This could be explained by the
fact that the number of particles and therefore
the number of interactions in the coarse-grained
system is lower, which means that splitting the
processing operations into different threads is
less efficient. It is worth noting that the performance behavior may be different for MPI or
hybrid parallelization methods.
However, when looking at the scale of the
performance increase, the decisive advantage
of the coarse-grained approach becomes apparent. It lies in the range from approximately 200
to 350, i.e., an improvement in performance in
the range of two orders of magnitude can be
observed. This performance improvement can
be primarily attributed to two factors. First,
the timestep in coarse-grained simulations is
ten times larger than that in atomistic sim-

4

Conclusions and Outlook

The ecological importance of SOM has driven
ongoing efforts to develop and refine SOM models that provide deeper insights into its processes at the molecular scale. In this paper, we introduced an improved parametrization scheme for coarse-grained SOM models,
which extends our previous work 54 . This new
approach enables direct conversion of atomistic
VSOMM2 models to their coarse-grained counterparts, which eliminates the need for atomistic MD simulations. In addition, it provides
the coarse-grained topology files in a more efficient and user-friendly manner.
We first assessed how the modified parameterization impacted the models’ properties. The
revised force constants reduced high vibrational
frequencies within the fragment molecules, as
evidenced by the power spectra, which led
to higher simulation stability. Consequently,
the time step could be extended to 20 fs, enhancing the performance. Importantly, the
reparametrization did not significantly increase
16

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-9llpf-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5933-5249 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY 4.0

the deviation between the bonded distributions
of atomistic and coarse-grained fragments, as
measured by the TMS.
To demonstrate the capability of the new protocol, we analyzed coarse-grained SOM models with varying compositions. The calculation
of the potential energies of the non-bonded interactions indicated that the Coulomb interactions acted as the driving force for the packing
of the SOM structures, which correlated with
the acidity of the SOM systems. A subdivision of the Lennard-Jones interactions provided
insight into how interactions changed with increasing water content. Exploring the larger
length scales and longer simulation times revealed a local phase separation process, notably
the formation of SOM voids, demonstrating the
advantages of the coarse-graining approach.
For future improvements, force constants for
bonds and angles could be refined by using an all-atom representation of the reference
molecules, improving parameter transferability between Swarm-CG and ETKDG. Moreover, it is feasible to optimize the determination of bonded interaction parameters through
the conformer search, particularly for a higher
number of fragments per molecule. For example, repetitive partial sequences could be
identified and considered separately during the
conformer search. As the molecules are composed of a relatively large but limited number
of fragments (please refer to Table S2 of the
Supplementary Information of Escalona et al. 6
or Figure S1 in the Supporting Information
of Dettmann et al. 54 ), one could also consider sampling all possible pairs of fragments,
e.g., through MD simulations, to construct a
comprehensive database of equilibration constants and force constants. This would make
it possible to skip the parameterization step
completely. Furthermore, instead of mapping
the atomistic structures, the algorithm could
be extended by constructing the coarse-grained
structures from the outset, to act as an independent modeler.
The present methodology allows for versatile
applications of coarse-grained SOM models in
simulations, including long-time simulations to
dynamically study pollutant interactions and

adsorption on nanoplastic particles. Moreover,
model realism could be improved by incorporating biologically relevant molecules such as
lipids, peptides, and carbohydrates.

Associated Content
Data Availability Statement
All topology files required to reproduce the
simulations, as well as the Python tool for
generating the coarse-grained SOM structures,
are available in Zenodo at DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.12942690.

Supporting Information
The Supporting Information is available free of
charge at https://pubs.acs.org.
It includes details about the modified
parametrization approach and conformer
search, as well as additional information about
the SOM compositions and further benchmark
results.

References
(1) Masoom, H.; Courtier-Murias, D.; Farooq, H.; Soong, R.; Kelleher, B. P.;
Zhang, C.; Maas, W. E.; Fey, M.; Kumar, R.; Monette, M.; Stronks, H. J.;
Simpson, M. J.; Simpson, A. J. Soil Organic Matter in Its Native State: Unravelling the Most Complex Biomaterial on
Earth. Environmental Science & Technology 2016, 50, 1670–1680.
(2) Jackson, R. B.; Lajtha, K.; Crow, S. E.;
Hugelius, G.; Kramer, M. G.; Piñeiro, G.
The Ecology of Soil Carbon: Pools, Vulnerabilities, and Biotic and Abiotic Controls. Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics 2017, 48, 419–445.
(3) Scharlemann, J. P.; Tanner, E. V.;
Hiederer, R.; Kapos, V. Global soil carbon: understanding and managing the
largest terrestrial carbon pool. Carbon
Management 2014, 5, 81–91.
17

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-9llpf-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5933-5249 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY 4.0

(4) Paustian, K.; Lehmann, J.; Ogle, S.;
Reay, D.; Robertson, G. P.; Smith, P.
Climate-smart soils. Nature 2016, 532,
49–57.

(14) Schulten, H.-R.; Schnitzer, M. Chemical
Model Structures for Soil Organic Matter
and Soils. Soil Science 1997, 162, 115–
130.

(5) Kibblewhite, M.; Ritz, K.; Swift, M. Soil
health in agricultural systems. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B:
Biological Sciences 2007, 363, 685–701.

(15) Schulten, H.-R.; Leinweber, P. New insights into organic-mineral particles: composition, properties and models of molecular structure. Biology and Fertility of Soils
2000, 30, 399–432.

(6) Escalona, Y.; Petrov, D.; Oostenbrink, C.
Vienna soil organic matter modeler 2
(VSOMM2). J. Mol. Graph. Model. 2021,
103, 107817.

(16) Schulten, H.-R. Soil Mineral-Organic
Matter-Microorganism Interactions and
Ecosystem Health, Dynamics, Mobility
and Transformation of Pollutants and Nutrients; Elsevier, 2002; p 351–381.

(7) Paul, E. A. The nature and dynamics of
soil organic matter: Plant inputs, microbial transformations, and organic matter
stabilization. Soil Biology and Biochemistry 2016, 98, 109–126.

(17) Schulten, H. R.; Plage, B.; Schnitzer, M. A
chemical structure for humic substances.
The Science of Nature 1991, 78, 311–312.

(8) Chen, X. D.;
Dunfield, K. E.;
Fraser, T. D.; Wakelin, S. A.; Richardson, A. E.; Condron, L. M. Soil biodiversity and biogeochemical function in
managed ecosystems. Soil Research 2020,
58, 1.

(18) Schulten, H. R.; Schnitzer, M. A state of
the art structural concept for humic substances. Naturwissenschaften 1993, 80,
29–30.
(19) Thiele-Bruhn, S.; Seibicke, T.; Schulten, H.; Leinweber, P. Sorption of Sulfonamide Pharmaceutical Antibiotics on
Whole Soils and Particle-Size Fractions.
Journal of Environmental Quality 2004,
33, 1331–1342.

(9) Stevenson, F. J. Humus chemistry, 2nd
ed.; John Wiley & Sons: Nashville, TN,
1994.
(10) International Humic Substances Society.
https://humic-substances.org.

(20) Schwarz, J.; Thiele-Bruhn, S.; Eckhardt, K.-U.; Schulten, H.-R. Sorption of
Sulfonamide Antibiotics to Soil Organic
Sorbents: Batch Experiments with Model
Compounds and Computational Chemistry. ISRN Soil Science 2012, 2012, 1–10.

(11) Kubicki, J. D., Ed. Molecular modeling of
geochemical reactions; John Wiley & Sons:
Nashville, TN, 2016.
(12) Senesi, N.; Xing, B.; Huang, P. M.
Biophysico-chemical processes involving
natural nonliving organic matter in environmental systems; Wiley Series Sponsored by IUPAC in Biophysico-Chemical
Processes in Environmental Systems;
Wiley-Interscience: Newy York, 2009.

(21) Schulten, H.-R. Analytical pyrolysis and
computational chemistry of aquatic humic
substances and dissolved organic matter.
Journal of Analytical and Applied Pyrolysis 1999, 49, 385–415.
(22) Schulten, H. Interactions of dissolved organic matter with xenobiotic compounds:
Molecular modeling in water. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 1999,
18, 1643–1655.

(13) Schulten, H. R.; Schnitzer, M. Threedimensional models for humic acids and
soil organic matter. Naturwissenschaften
1995, 82, 487–498.

18
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-9llpf-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5933-5249 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY 4.0

(23) Sutton, R.; Sposito, G.; Diallo, M. S.;
Schulten, H. Molecular simulation of a
model of dissolved organic matter. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry
2005, 24, 1902–1911.

Al-Youbi, A. O.; Leinweber, P.; Kühn, O.
Interaction of Polar and Nonpolar
Organic Pollutants with Soil Organic
Matter:
Sorption Experiments and
Molecular Dynamics Simulation. Sci.
Total Environ. 2015, 508C, 276–287.

(24) Galicia-Andrés, E.; Escalona, Y.; Oostenbrink, C.; Tunega, D.; Gerzabek, M. H.
Soil organic matter stabilization at molecular scale: The role of metal cations and
hydrogen bonds. Geoderma 2021, 401,
115237.

(31) Ahmed, A. A.; Thiele-Bruhn, S.; Leinweber, P.; Kühn, O. Towards a molecular
level understanding of the sulfanilamidesoil organic matter-interaction. Science
of The Total Environment 2016, 559,
347–355.

(25) Aquino, A. J. A.; Tunega, D.; Haberhauer, G.; Gerzabek, M. H.; Lischka, H. Interaction of the 2, 4dichlorophenoxyacetic acid herbicide with
soil organic matter moieties: a theoretical study. European Journal of Soil Science 2007, 58, 889–899.

(32) Gros, P.; Ahmed, A.; Kühn, O.; Leinweber, P. Glyphosate Binding in Soil as
Revealed by Sorption Experiments and
Quantum-Chemical Modeling. Sci. Total
Environ. 2017, 586, 527–535.
(33) Ahmed, A. A.; Gros, P.; Kühn, O.; Leinweber, P. Molecular Level Investigation
of the Role of Peptide Interactions in
the Glyphosate Analytics. Chemosphere
2018, 196, 129–134.

(26) Aquino, A. J. A.; Tunega, D.; Schaumann, G. E.; Haberhauer, G.; Gerzabek, M. H.; Lischka, H. Stabilizing Capacity of Water Bridges in Nanopore Segments of Humic Substances: A Theoretical Investigation. The Journal of Physical
Chemistry C 2009, 113, 16468–16475.

(34) Sündermann, A.; Solc, R.; Tunega, D.;
Haberhauer, G.; Gerzabek, M. H.;
Oostenbrink, C. Vienna Soil-OrganicMatter Modeler—Generating condensedphase models of humic substances. Journal of Molecular Graphics and Modelling
2015, 62, 253–261.

(27) Ahmed, A. A.; Kühn, O.; Leinweber, P.
Controlled experimental soil organic matter modification for study of organic pollutant interactions in soil. Science of The
Total Environment 2012, 441, 151–158.

(35) Piccolo, A. The supramolecular structure
of humic substances. Soil Science 2001,
166, 810–832.

(28) Ahmed, A. A.; Kühn, O.; Aziz, S. G.;
Hilal, R. H.; Leinweber, P. How soil
organic matter composition controls
hexachlorobenzene–soil-interactions:
Adsorption isotherms and quantum
chemical modeling. Science of The Total
Environment 2014, 476–477, 98–106.

(36) Piccolo, A. Advances in Agronomy; Elsevier, 2002; p 57–134.
(37) Aquino, A. J.; Tunega, D.; Pašalić, H.;
Schaumann, G. E.; Haberhauer, G.; Gerzabek, M. H.; Lischka, H. Study of solvent effect on the stability of water bridgelinked carboxyl groups in humic acid models. Geoderma 2011, 169, 20–26.

(29) Ahmed, A. A.;
Leinweber, P.;
Kühn, O. A computational study of
hexachlorobenzene-soil organic matterinteractions. Journal of Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry 2014, 13,
1450009.

(38) Schaumann, G. E.; Gildemeister, D.;
Kunhi Mouvenchery, Y.; Spielvogel, S.;
Diehl, D. Interactions between cations and

(30) Ahmed, A. A.;
Thiele-Bruhn, S.;
Aziz, S. G.; Hilal, R. H.; Elroby, S. A.;
19

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-9llpf-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5933-5249 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY 4.0

water molecule bridges in soil organic matter. Journal of Soils and Sediments 2013,
13, 1579–1588.

(46) Harmandaris, V. A.; Adhikari, N. P.;
van der Vegt, N. F. A.; Kremer, K. Hierarchical Modeling of Polystyrene: From
Atomistic to Coarse-Grained Simulations.
Macromolecules 2006, 39, 6708–6719.

(39) Gerzabek, M. H.; Aquino, A. J. A.;
Balboa, Y. I. E.; Galicia-Andrés, E.;
Grančič, P.; Oostenbrink, C.; Petrov, D.;
Tunega, D. A contribution of molecular
modeling to supramolecular structures in
soil organic matter. Journal of Plant Nutrition and Soil Science 2022, 185, 44–59.

(47) Darré, L.; Machado, M. R.; Brandner, A. F.; González, H. C.; Ferreira, S.;
Pantano, S. SIRAH: A Structurally Unbiased Coarse-Grained Force Field for Proteins with Aqueous Solvation and LongRange Electrostatics. Journal of Chemical
Theory and Computation 2015, 11, 723–
739.

(40) Petrov, D.; Tunega, D.; Gerzabek, M. H.;
Oostenbrink, C. Molecular Dynamics Simulations of the Standard Leonardite Humic Acid: Microscopic Analysis of the
Structure and Dynamics. Environmental
Science & Technology 2017, 51, 5414–
5424.

(48) Machado, M. R.; Barrera, E. E.; Klein, F.;
Sóñora, M.; Silva, S.; Pantano, S. The
SIRAH 2.0 Force Field: Altius, Fortius,
Citius. Journal of Chemical Theory and
Computation 2019, 15, 2719–2733.

(41) Petrov, D.; Tunega, D.; Gerzabek, M. H.;
Oostenbrink, C. Molecular modelling of
sorption processes of a range of diverse
small organic molecules in Leonardite humic acid. European Journal of Soil Science
2019, 71, 831–844.

(49) Orsi, M.; Essex, J. W. The ELBA Force
Field for Coarse-Grain Modeling of Lipid
Membranes. PLoS ONE 2011, 6, e28637.
(50) Marrink, S. J.; Risselada, H. J.; Yefimov, S.; Tieleman, D. P.; de Vries, A. H.
The MARTINI Force Field:
Coarse
Grained Model for Biomolecular Simulations. The Journal of Physical Chemistry
B 2007, 111, 7812–7824.

(42) Gotsmy, M.; Escalona, Y.; Oostenbrink, C.; Petrov, D. Exploring the structure and dynamics of proteins in soil organic matter. Proteins: Structure, Function, and Bioinformatics 2021, 89, 925–
936.

(51) Feng, H.; Zhang, H.; Cao, H.; Sun, Y.;
Zhang, A.; Fu, J. Application of a
Novel Coarse-Grained Soil Organic Matter Model in the Environment. Environmental Science & Technology 2018, 52,
14228–14234.

(43) Escalona, Y.; Petrov, D.; Oostenbrink, C.
Modeling soil organic matter: Changes
in macroscopic properties due to microscopic changes. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta 2021, 307, 228–241.
(44) Galicia-Andrés, E.; Oostenbrink, C.;
Gerzabek, M. H.; Tunega, D. On the Adsorption Mechanism of Humic Substances
on Kaolinite and Their Microscopic Structure. Minerals 2021, 11, 1138.

(52) Xue, Q.; Jiao, Z.; Liu, X.; Pan, W.; Fu, J.;
Zhang, A. Dynamic Behavior and Interaction Mechanism of Soil Organic Matter in
Water Systems: A Coarse-Grained Molecular Dynamics Study. Environmental Science & Technology 2023, 58, 1531–1540.

(45) Escalona, Y.; Petrov, D.; GaliciaAndrés, E.; Oostenbrink, C. Exploring
the macroscopic properties of humic substances using modeling and molecular simulations. Agronomy (Basel) 2023, 13,
1044.

(53) Souza, P. C. T.;
Alessandri, R.;
Barnoud, J.; Thallmair, S.; Faustino, I.;
Grünewald, F.; Patmanidis, I.; Abdizadeh, H.; Bruininks, B. M. H.;
Wassenaar, T. A.; Kroon, P. C.; Melcr, J.;
20

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-9llpf-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5933-5249 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY 4.0

Nieto, V.; Corradi, V.; Khan, H. M.;
Domański, J.; Javanainen, M.; MartinezSeara, H.; Reuter, N.; Best, R. B.;
Vattulainen, I.; Monticelli, L.; Periole, X.;
Tieleman, D. P.; de Vries, A. H.; Marrink, S. J. Martini 3: a general purpose
force field for coarse-grained molecular
dynamics. Nature Methods 2021, 18,
382–388.

for coarse-graining soil organic matter
molecules”. 2024; https://zenodo.org/
doi/10.5281/zenodo.12942690.
(60) Abraham, M. J.; Murtola, T.; Schulz, R.;
Páll, S.; Smith, J. C.; Hess, B.; Lindahl, E. GROMACS: High performance
molecular simulations through multi-level
parallelism from laptops to supercomputers. SoftwareX 2015, 1-2, 19–25.

(54) Dettmann, L. F.; Kühn, O.; Ahmed, A. A.
Martini-Based Coarse-Grained Soil Organic Matter Model Derived from Atomistic Simulations. Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 2024, 20,
5291–5305.

(61) Harris, C. R.; Millman, K. J.; van der
Walt, S. J.; Gommers, R.; Virtanen, P.;
Cournapeau, D.; Wieser, E.; Taylor, J.;
Berg, S.; Smith, N. J.; Kern, R.; Picus, M.;
Hoyer, S.; van Kerkwijk, M. H.; Brett, M.;
Haldane, A.; del Rı́o, J. F.; Wiebe, M.;
Peterson, P.; Gérard-Marchant, P.; Sheppard, K.; Reddy, T.; Weckesser, W.; Abbasi, H.; Gohlke, C.; Oliphant, T. E. Array
programming with NumPy. Nature 2020,
585, 357–362.

(55) Riniker, S.; Landrum, G. A. Better informed distance geometry: Using what
we know to improve conformation generation. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2015, 55, 2562–
2574.
(56) Empereur-Mot, C.; Pesce, L.; Doni, G.;
Bochicchio, D.; Capelli, R.; Perego, C.;
Pavan, G. M. Swarm-CG: Automatic
parametrization of bonded terms in
MARTINI-based coarse-grained models of
simple to complex molecules via fuzzy selftuning particle swarm optimization. ACS
Omega 2020, 5, 32823–32843.

(62) Hunter, J. D. Matplotlib: A 2D graphics
environment. Computing in Science & Engineering 2007, 9, 90–95.
(63) Gowers, R.; Linke, M.; Barnoud, J.;
Reddy, T.; Melo, M.; Seyler, S.;
Domański, J.; Dotson, D.; Buchoux, S.;
Kenney, I.; Beckstein, O. MDAnalysis: A
Python Package for the Rapid Analysis
of Molecular Dynamics Simulations. Proceedings of the Python in Science Conference. 2016.

(57) Potter, T. D.; Barrett, E. L.; Miller, M. A.
Automated coarse-grained mapping algorithm for the Martini force field and
benchmarks for membrane-water partitioning. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2021,
17, 5777–5791.

(64) Michaud-Agrawal, N.; Denning, E. J.;
Woolf, T. B.; Beckstein, O. MDAnalysis:
A toolkit for the analysis of molecular dynamics simulations. Journal of Computational Chemistry 2011, 32, 2319–2327.

(58) Potter, T. D.; Haywood, N.; Teixeira, A.;
Hodges, G.; Barrett, E. L.; Miller, M. A.
Partitioning into phosphatidylcholinecholesterol membranes: liposome measurements, coarse-grained simulations,
and implications for bioaccumulation.
Environ. Sci. Process. Impacts 2023, 25,
1082–1093.

(65) Pérez, F.; Granger, B. E. IPython: a
System for Interactive Scientific Computing. Computing in Science and Engineering 2007, 9, 21–29.
(66) Humphrey, W.; Dalke, A.; Schulten, K.
VMD – Visual Molecular Dynamics. Journal of Molecular Graphics 1996, 14, 33–
38.

(59) Dettmann, L. F.; Kühn, O.; A. Ahmed, A.
Topology files and Python tool for
”An automated parametrization approach
21

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-9llpf-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5933-5249 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY 4.0

(67) Bussi, G.; Donadio, D.; Parrinello, M.
Canonical sampling through velocity
rescaling. The Journal of Chemical
Physics 2007, 126 .
(68) Berendsen, H. J. C.; Postma, J. P. M.;
van Gunsteren, W. F.; Hermans, J. The
Jerusalem Symposia on Quantum Chemistry and Biochemistry; Springer Netherlands, 1981; pp 331–342.
(69) Parrinello, M.; Rahman, A. Polymorphic
transitions in single crystals: A new
molecular dynamics method. Journal of
Applied Physics 1981, 52, 7182–7190.
(70) Poger, D.; Gunsteren, W. F. V.;
Mark, A. E. A new force field for
simulating phosphatidylcholine bilayers.
Journal of Computational Chemistry
2009, 31, 1117–1125.
(71) Schmid, N.;
Eichenberger, A. P.;
Choutko, A.; Riniker, S.; Winger, M.;
Mark, A. E.; van Gunsteren, W. F.
Definition and testing of the GROMOS
force-field versions 54A7 and 54B7.
European Biophysics Journal 2011, 40,
843–856.
(72) Winger, M.; Trzesniak, D.; Baron, R.; van
Gunsteren, W. F. On using a too large integration time step in molecular dynamics simulations of coarse-grained molecular models. Physical Chemistry Chemical
Physics 2009,
(73) Pereira, G. P.;
Alessandri, R.;
Domı́nguez, M.;
Araya-Osorio, R.;
Grünewald, L.;
Borges-Araújo, L.;
Wu, S.; Marrink, S. J.; Souza, P. C. T.;
Mera-Adasme, R. Bartender: Martini 3
Bonded Terms via Quantum MechanicsBased Molecular Dynamics. Journal of
Chemical Theory and Computation 2024,
20, 5763–5773.
(74) Rubner, Y.; Tomasi, C.; Guibas, L. J. A
metric for distributions with applications
to image databases. Sixth International
Conference on Computer Vision (IEEE
Cat. No.98CH36271). 2002.
22
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-9llpf-v2 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5933-5249 Content not peer-reviewed by ChemRxiv. License: CC BY 4.0

