The CO2 decomposition is needed high temperature in conventional methods. Our aim is
to reduce the CO2 decomposition temperature. In this view multi-molecular catalysis is
essential. It is achieved through Multiple catalytic sites. The Multiple catalytic sites are
created through a novel intercrossing framework catalyst. The intercrossing framework is
created between MgO framework and AlPO4 framework by the template (TPAOH). The
catalyst has multiple acidic sites on superoxide ion, oxyanion, octahedral Al3+ and Mg2+. The
intercrossing frameworks is achieved in first time and the material is named as Kankarlite-2.
The active sites and intercrossed framework are confirmed in the crystal structure drawn by
XRD data. The surface area is 60m2/g and pore volume is 2.9cm3/g. The TGA and TEM
analysis are the supportive evidence for the intercrossing of the two frameworks. Though the
surface area and pore volume is low, the activity is too high due to the intercrossing
framework. The effective catalytic activity at lower temperature may be due to the
cooperative effect of such multiple active sites which leads to the multi-molecular
assembling of CO2 molecules. This assembling reduces the CO2 decomposition
temperature (63%). The multi-molecular assembling is calculated by a new formula of P n = R
Thus we have achieved intercrossing framework catalyst and multi-molecular catalysis for
Carbon capturing at lower temperature.
Intercrossed framework, multiple acidic sites,

multi-molecular catalysis, CO2
.


1. Introduction
Global warming is an international issue [1] and the most important anthropogenic
greenhouse gas contributing to the enhanced greenhouse effect both presently and in the
foreseeable future is CO2 [2]. The combustion of most carbon-containing substances
produces CO2 [3]. Several technologies are available for CO2 capture, including chemical
absorption, membrane separation, adsorption and cryogenic CO2 capture. The traditional
method of absorption by liquid amines [4], ionic liquids [5], amino acid-functionalized
ionic liquid [6], ionic-mixed solvents [7] and deep eutectic solvents [8] are promising
materials. Yet, despite their advantages, they suffer from serious corrosion problems,
considerable energy loss, high sorbent cost, lower gas–liquid interfacial surface area and
ineffective regeneration [9]. As a result of these limitations, CO2 adsorption using solid
porous materials especially aluminophosphate materials offers several advantages,
including enhanced uptake efficiency, simple recovery, high adsorption capacity even in
humid conditions, ease of handling and material stability [10]. Generally, the AlPO4
materials are microporous in nature, which restricts the incorporation of large organic
molecules into their pores. Their limited pore size hinders their practicality in catalyzing
reactions involving large molecules. In order to overcome this limitation and enhance the
pore size of AlPO4 materials, numerous research groups have undertaken efforts to create
mesoporous molecular sieves [11]. Mesoporous AlPO4 molecular sieves are typically
synthesized using the conventional hydrothermal method [12]. This involves crystallizing
an active aqueous aluminophosphate gel that contains templating agents like organic
amines or quaternary ammonium ions [13]. But the disadvantage of this method is that
the process has taken a long time [14] and also requires high temperature [15]. The
reaction had been carried out in an autoclave. So there is some necessity to overcome
such issues. In this paper, we have explored the room temperature synthesis of MgO2



AlPO4 catalyst with intercrossing frameworks using the simple Sol gel method in a short
period of time compared to the synthesis process in reported literature [16].
Isomorphously substituted Mg-AlPO4 has been reported in the literature by CTAB [16],
di-n-propyleneamine [17] etc without autoclave. But the framework intercrossing in
MgO-AlPO4 has not yet been reported. The term intercrossing means two different
frameworks are intercrossed together, creating a single structure with unique properties
[18] [19]. There are only a few reports about intercrossing framework in carbon
nanotubes [20] and polymers [21]. As of now, there is no report on the intercrossing
framework in mesoporous and microporous molecular sieves. Thus the synthesized MgOAlPO4 is applied for CO2 decomposition. In the reported literature, n-butylamine
templated isomorphous substituted Mg-AlPO4 was used as a catalyst for CO2
decomposition. Though employing the same CO2 decomposition method as in the present
study, the achieved oxygen selectivity was only 50% [22]. So to attain higher oxygen
selectivity, a novel intercrossed framework of MgO-AlPO4 is synthesized and applied for
CO2 decomposition. The framework creates multiple acidic sites which are useful to
reduce CO2 decomposition activation energy and hence the reaction may be possible at
lower temperature with high O2 selectivity.
2. Experimental
2.1 Materials
The following materials are used as a source for the synthesis of MgO-AlPO4:
Aluminium hydroxide (Merck), Orthophosphoric acid (Nice, GR), Magnesium sulphate
(Merck,GR) and Tetrapropylammonium hydroxide (99% purity, Lobal Chemie). All these
chemicals are used in the synthesis without further treatment.
2.2 Synthesis of MgO-AlPO4
MgO-AlPO4 is prepared by implementing the sol-gel method with the molar composition
of the gel is Al(OH)3 : H3PO4 : TPAOH : 0.05 MgSO4: 13.8H2O. About 7.8g of
aluminium hydroxide is mixed in 100ml of deionized water and 20ml of TPAOH is
dissolved in 50ml of water. The two solutions are combined and stirred for one hour at
room temperature using a magnetic stirrer. Following that, approximately 5.8ml of
orthophosphoric acid and 6g of magnesium sulphate are added to the mixture, which is
continuously stirred for 2 hours to obtain a homogeneous mixture. The resulting mixture
is kept undisturbed for 16 hours for crystallization. Then the supernatant liquid is
decanted and the settled precipitate is washed thoroughly with deionized water until the
pH becomes neutral. The precipitate is then dried at 200°C in a hot oven, followed by
calcination at 400°C for 5 hours to remove the template molecules from the pores.
2.3 Catalytic reactor
The catalytic reaction is performed through a U-shaped tube filled with calcined
catalyst, both sides of the U-shaped reactor are packed with asbestos wool. It is immersed
in engine oil to maintain the temperature. The engine oil beaker is placed on a hot plate.
The inlet of the reactor is connected to a cylinder and the outlet is connected to a gas
collector. The CO2 gas is allowed to flow through the reactor. The product is collected in a
gas collector.
2.4 Gas Chromatography analysis
The efficiency of the decomposition process is analyzed by a Shimadzu chromatograph
equipped with a thermal conductivity detector and packed column. Chromatographic
conditions are maintained at 5 V and a current of 115 mA. The analysis is conducted by
collecting the final gas product every hour to optimize the temperature, flow rate, catalyst
dosage and time on stream.
2.5 Characterization techniques
The crystal structure of the materials is characterised by X-ray powder diffraction
patterns in the 2θ range of 5° - 80° with the use of Bruker, an advanced D8 X-ray
diffractometer with Cu-Kα radiation. Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra are recorded
by the FT-IR 8400S (Shimadzu) spectrometer. The samples were pressed into a pellet with
KBr. It is analyzed in the wavelength domain of 400 – 4000 cm-1. The Brunauer-EmmettTeller (BET) surface area measurements are carried out by micrometrics ASAP2010
instrument. The samples were previously outgassed for 30 minutes at 150°C and then heated
for 120 minutes at 350°C. N2 adsorption and desorption are recorded at 77K. Static
chemisorption is carried out with the Quantachrome autosorb iq instrument. About 0.112g
sample is packed in the bed and degassed with Helium gas at 150°C for 2 hours. The
adsorption of ammonia gas has been carried at 40°C and desorbed at 400°C for 35minutes.
High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) images are taken by the JEOL
JEM 2100 (200 kV). Dropping a colloidal solution over carbon-coated copper grids yielded
the samples. This microscope enables to view lattice resolution of 0.14 nm and point-to-point
resolution of 0.19 nm.
3. Result and Discussion
XRD Analysis
The XRD analysis of MgO-AlPO4 has been carried out from 2θ range of 5 to 80º. It is

shown in Figure 1. The peaks at 8.86°, 16.2° and 21.29° are indexed to (110), (301) and (512)
planes are resembled that the crystal system of AlPO4 is triclinic (match file - 96-101-0142
and unit cell parameters are a=6.13, b=7.51, c=8.58). The d-spacing and the peaks at 38.2°,
44.5°,66.8° and 78.2° are indexed to (111), (200), (202) and (311) planes which are
resembled that the crystal system of Mg-O is cubic phase. These peaks are good in agreement
with the match file- 96-901-3253 and the unit cell parameters are a=b=c= 3.97.

Silverish grey- Aluminium, Green- Phosphorous, Brown- Oxygen, Pink- Magnesium
Intercrossing of framework
The MgO framework and AlPO4 framework are intercrossed between them. It may be
due to the H+ ion released from H3PO4 which is reacted with Mg(OH)2 to produce MgO
framework. The formed phosphate ion induces the AlPO4 framework. Ultimately, the
phosphoric acid induces both the frameworks and so the intercrossing of the two frameworks
happens (Figure 2).
3.2 Proposed mechanism for Superoxide ion and octahedral Mg catalytic site formation
The multiple acidic sites formation is discussed in the following sections 4.2 and 4.3. The
superoxide ion formation is confirmed in the crystal structure which is drawn based on XRD
pattern (Figure 2). The superoxide ion formation is may be due to the template effect on MgO
framework. The template has OH- group, which can be exchanged with SO42- (two template
molecules) as shown in Scheme S1. The sulphate ion has coordinated two template molecules
as an ion pair that is acting as a templating agent. The OH- group reacts with Mg2+ to form
Magnesium hydroxide (Mg2+-(OH)2. These magnesium hydroxides are condensed together to
produce the MgO framework with the superoxide ion (Scheme S1). In the MgO framework,
oxygen has four coordination. The two excess negative charges that appear on oxygen act as
superoxide ion, which is balanced by two protons. Similarly, the 4 negative charges on Mg2+
are balanced by four protons. The H3PO4 initiates the Mg(OH)2 condensation reaction. So
there is a possibility for the intercrossing of the AlPO4 framework and the MgO framework.
3.3 Oxyanions and octahedral aluminium catalytic site formation
The Oxyanion formation is confirmed by crystal structure drawn on the basis of XRD
pattern (Figure 2). In AlPO4 framework, aluminium is in octahedral coordination, it may be
due to the template effect, because of the octahedral coordination of aluminium in AlPO4
framework, the oxyanion is formed. The aluminium has three negative charges and oxygen
has one negative charge which is balanced by protons as shown in Scheme S2.
3.4 FT-IR Analysis
The FT-IR spectrum of as-prepared and calcinated MgO-AlPO4 are shown in Figure
3. The broad band at 3500 – 3670 cm-1 is attributed to the hydroxyl group vibration of MgOH, Al-OH groups [24]. An absorption band at 1648 cm-1 is due to the N-H bending mode of
template molecules [25]. A smaller vibration near 1520 cm-1 is owing to the bending mode of
water molecules [15]. These three bands are reduced after calcination. The absorption in the
region 1100 cm-1 is due to asymmetric stretching vibration of the tetrahedral framework [26].
Symmetric stretching vibration of tetrahedral framework or AlO6 groups is observed at 725
cm-1 [27] and 481 cm-1 is ascribed to stretching vibration of Mg-O vibration [28] or bending
vibrations of P-O in AlPO4 [29]. This is confirmed the presence of magnesium oxide and
Aluminophosphate (MgO-AlPO4) framework.
3.5 Thermogravimetric Analysis
The thermo–gravimetry analysis (TGA) and differentiation thermo–gravimetric
analysis (DTG) curves of MgO-AlPO4 are presented in Figure 4. The TGA curve of MgOAlPO4 is shown 11.3% weight loss with an exothermic process from 100 to 200°C attributed
to the desorption of water [30]. Then 8.46% mass loss between 210 and 325°C assigned to
the decomposition of TPAOH [25] and 5.62% mass loss is observed at 450°C, which may be
due to the removal of carbon residues. Because the decomposition of TPAOH leaves fewer
carbon residues, it may decompose at 450°C [31]. In the reported literature, there is a heavy
weight loss of 24% with an endothermic process from 80 to 216°C, which is due to the
removal of water along with template molecules. And the second weight loss of 14.06% from
250-310°C is due to the oxidative decomposition of remaining template molecules [32].
Surface area (m2/g)

Pore Diameter (nm)

Pore Volume (cm3/g)
MgO-AlPO4
It is clear that the MgO-AlPO4 has a type-IV isotherm with H1 type hysteresis loop which
clearly confirms the mesoporous nature. But the hysteresis loop represents the existence of
non-uniform mesopores [33]. This may be due to the two-pore formation in MgO-AlPO4. In
the reported literature, CTAB templated, isomorphous substituted Mg-AlPO4 has a pore
diameter of 2 nm [34]. Similarly, TPAOH templated Mg-AlPO4 has a pore diameter of 22nm
[17]. In the present study, MgO-AlPO4 has two pore formation (Figure 5). The diameters of
two pores are 4 nm and 5nm. It may be due to intercrossing of two frameworks (Figure 2).
3.7 Static chemisorption
The static chemisorption is shown in the Figure 6. The analysis is performed to
determine the acid sites in the MgO-AlPO4 catalyst. Ammonia desorbed at 400°C proved
that the acid sites are strong. Total ammonia desorption from MgO-AlPO4 is 0.69mmol/g.

K=

(1)

where K is Conversion constant

We have applied this equation for CO2 decomposition over the catalyst MgO-AlPO4. In this
catalytic process, the value of conversion and surface area are 99% and 59m2/g respectively.

So,

K=

= 1.6

It is assumed that If K˂ 1 it is depended on acidic/active sites of the catalyst
If K>1 it is depended on the surface area of the catalyst
The CO2 decomposition reaction has the K value is 1.6 over the MgO-AlPO4 catalyst which
is depended on the acidic / active sites. In order to find out the number of molecules
assembling on an acidic / active site per minute for conversion, we need to correlate the
conversion with temperature. So, we need the data for rate constant and total active/ acidic
sites (concentration of acidity). These two values can be obtained from the intercept (rate
constant) and slope (concentration of acidity) of the plot. By using these data, we have
formulated a new formula for calculating the number of molecules assembling over acidic /
active site per minute.
The formula is as follows.
Number of molecules assembling over an acidic / active site per minute, P n = R
(2)

where Pn – multimolecular Pillared assembling of CO2 on acidic/active site
R- rate constant
m- active/acidic site concentration
T- temperature
W- weight of the catalyst
t- time

Pn= 95.61 x

= 8 molecules
If more than two molecules assembling on active/acidic site, it may be consider as a CO2
pillar. Now, we substitute the values, which are obtained from the Figure 8 in the equation -2,
we have a result of 8 molecules assembling on active/acidic site per minute. So, it is a multimolecular pillared assembling of CO2. The same formula is applied for various catalysts for
verifying its validity (Table S2). All catalysts have ‘K’ value more than 1 which is indicated
that the CO2 conversion reaction is depended on acidic / active sites. The catalysts which
have positive value of ‘m’ is denoted that the acidic/active sites are active during the reaction,
but the catalysts which have negative value of ‘m’ is denoted that the acidic/active sites are
deactivated during the reaction (Table S2). The deactivation means that the conversion
decreases with increased of temperature. So the multi-molecular assembling mechanism is
not applicable for the catalyst with negative value of Pn.
4.3 Proposed Mechanism for the multi-molecular pillared decomposition of CO2
The multi-molecular pillared decomposition means that many molecules are arranged
one and above and formed a pillar like structure. The length of the pillar is depended on the
acidic site affinity towards CO2 molecule. The strength of the acidic sites depends on the
metal ion and its co-ordination in the framework. The multi-molecular pillared assembling
mechanism is shown in Scheme S3 and it is proposed based on the formula (2). As per the
formula (2) 8 molecules of CO2 assembling as a multimolecular pillar on two acidic sites.
Then the pillar has positive charge on each oxygen atom and the positive charges are
repelling themselves to break down the pillar to produce oxygen and olefinic carbon chain.
At the end of the reaction the olefinic chain is removed from the acidic sites. The olefinic
carbon chain is an allene molecule with the ketonic group at both end (Scheme S3). It is a
new molecule. Thus the carbon are captured from carbon dioxide and O2 is released which is
the important process for global warming reduction. This reaction is otherwise known as
carbon capturing. This mechanism is supported by CO% (Table S2). If the catalyst is not
followed the multi-molecular assembling mechanism, the CO production is high and also Pn
is negative (Table S2). If the catalyst followed the multi-molecular assembling mechanism, it
is produced less CO and high O2%. So, these data are proved the multi-molecular pillared
decomposition of CO2.
4.4 UV-Visible Spectrum
The multimolecular pillared decomposition of CO2 is confirmed by the formation of a
new molecule of Octa-allene diketone. So we have characterized the catalyst after the
reaction by UV-Vis spectrum. The UV–Vis spectrum of MgO-AlPO4 after reaction is shown
in the Figure 9 in order to confirm the presence of diketone product in the pores of the
catalyst.
The catalyst reduces the CO2 decomposition temperature (63%) compared to the

conventional methods. The intercrossing framework of MgO and AlPO4 is an effective
catalyst for CO2 decomposition at lower temperature and the carbon is captured as a new octa
allene diketone molecule.
