A Fully Light-Driven Approach to Separate
Carbon Dioxide from Emission Streams
Bayu I. Z. Ahmad,1 Kiser Z. Colley,1 Andrew J. Musser,1 and Phillip J. Milner1,2,*
Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Cornell University; Ithaca, New York 14850, United States
Lead contact
Carbon capture from industrial point sources is an essential component of the global effort to mitigate
climate risks. However, traditional approaches require significant energy input—often provided,
counterproductively, by fossil fuel combustion. Using sunlight directly as the energy source would
significantly improve the energy efficiency of carbon capture processes. Herein, we report the first fully
visible light-driven CO2 separation system, in which carbon capture is achieved via the
photoenolization/cycloaddition reaction of inexpensive 2-methylbenzophenone with CO2, and CO2
release is realized through an intramolecular photodecarboxylation reaction. This system operates
isothermally, works with natural sunlight, and facilitates CO 2 removal from natural gas flue emissions,
providing a blueprint for other non-thermal chemical separations.
The rising atmospheric levels of CO2 represent a significant
climate threat to humanity. Meeting the goals of the Paris
Accords is ambitious, and, even in the best case scenario,
will require the removal of CO2 from industrial point sources
such as fossil fuel-fired power plants.1,2 However, current
temperature-swing carbon capture technologies are highly
energy- and cost-intensive, prohibiting their global
deployment.3 Carbon capture is fundamentally energydemanding due to the entropic penalty associated with
concentrating CO2 from a dilute stream into a pure gas for
subsequent sequestration or valorization.4 Currently, the
bulk of the required energy is counterintuitively provided by
fossil fuel combustion; in this case, energy transition efforts
may be more productive towards reducing atmospheric CO 2
levels than post-combustion carbon capture.3,5 The use of
renewable energy to power CO2 capture would help to
overcome this challenge. In particular, sunlight is attractive
because it is the most abundant energy resource on Earth,6
leading to its rapidly growing use for electricity generation
and other environmental applications.7–12
In the simplest configuration, a solar panel could be
employed for solar-to-electricity or solar-to-heat conversion
to drive a traditional temperature-swing process. However,
the inefficiency of carbon capture is exacerbated by many
energy exchange and conversion steps, leading to
significant energy loss.13–15 Current accessible, commercial
solar panels can harness up to 30% of solar energy;16
however, a recent analysis of a solar direct air CO2 capture
system revealed only ~8% of the energy supply results in
CO2 removal,14 reflecting at most a 2.4% solar energy
efficiency. We propose that the direct use of (sun)light to
drive CO2 capture and release could help to overcome
these inefficiencies. There are scattered examples of using
light to drive carbon capture/release processes, but most
exhibit low capture capacities, require additional cooling,
and/or rely on ultraviolet (UV) light irradiation, which is

scarce within the solar spectrum (Figure 1A).17–22 These
drawbacks generally stem from using light to drive only the
release step, with capture achieved in the dark (Figure 1B).
Such systems with a thermodynamic driving force sufficient
for CO2 capture from dilute sources, such as the flue gas of
power plants (4–15% CO2),23 typically require high-energy
UV light to drive CO2 release. In contrast, a carbon capture
strategy that utilizes visible light (380–780 nm)—which is
abundant within the solar light spectrum (Figure 1A)—for
both the capture and release steps would be an energysaving strategy with sufficient thermodynamic driving force
to facilitate challenging separations (Figure 1C).
Nature provides inspiration for the design of visible lightdriven pathways for both CO2 capture and release.
Photosynthetic organisms fix CO2 on massive scale using
enols generated in the active site of the enzyme RuBisCo,
yet enols (and carbon-based nucleophiles in general)
remain largely unstudied for chemisorptive carbon
capture.24 As a potential synthetic analog of this
transformation, 2-alkylphenyl ketones can undergo a
photoenolization/Diels-Alder (PEDA) reaction with CO2,
although this process typically requires UV light irradiation
and relatively long reaction times (≥ 2 h) under an
atmosphere of pure CO2, which are not realistic conditions
for large-scale carbon capture applications.25–27 However,
PEDA has never been paired with a CO2-releasing
mechanism to produce a formal CO2 separation system.
Nonetheless, the oxidative decarboxylation of phenylacetic
acids is a common pathway in both biology (Figure 1E) and
photoredox catalysis,28–30 potentially offering a pathway for
CO2 release if an optimal photocatalyst can be identified.
Through the combination of these two reactions, we report
herein the first fully visible light-driven system for reversible
CO2 capture, providing a new platform for sustainable
separations that do not require careful thermal
management (Figure 1F).
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION



CO2 capture using visible light
We first evaluated whether PEDA can be conducted with
shorter reaction times and visible light irradiation. Among 2alkylphenyl ketones, 2-methylbenzophenone (1) was
chosen as a model sorbent because of its low cost and
absorbance in the high-energy portion of the visible light
region (Figure S27).31,32 CO2 capture was first evaluated
using varying concentrations of 1 dissolved in the green
solvent dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) under purple light (390
nm) irradiation (Figure 2A, see Supplemental Information
for details). No effort was made to exclude H2O or O2 from
these experiments. At lower concentrations (0.1 M), a high
conversion to 2 (59%) could be achieved in only 30 min.
This amount represents more than half of the theoretical
uptake capacity (5.5 mmol g−1 of 1), comparable to other
carbon capture technologies.18–22,33 Higher overall
concentrations of 2 (reflecting more CO2 capture) could be
achieved using higher initial concentrations of 1 (up to 2 M);
thus, a concentration of 2 M was employed for subsequent
experiments. Similar performance was observed for CO2
capture with or without fan-cooling (Figure S17), indicating
that careful thermal management is not necessary for this
approach. This represents a significant advantage over
systems in which only the carbon release step is driven via

light irradiation, which typically causes warming of the
solution that can interfere with subsequent capture
steps.21,22
The performance of 1 was next interrogated for CO2 capture
from dilute streams (Figure 2A). Although the capture
capacity expectedly decreased for streams with lower
partial pressures of CO2, the capture rate was still
satisfactory even for a 10% CO2 in N2 stream after 30 min
(26% of the pure CO2 capacity).34 The presence of O2 in flue
gas often presents a challenge for traditional sorbents,
which are prone to oxidative degradation.35–37 In contrast,
the addition of 3% O2 to a 10% CO2 in N2 stream, simulating
the composition of a natural gas-fired power plant emission
stream 23, only results in a slight decrease in the yield of 2
after 30 min (Figure 2A). This decrease is likely due to triplet
quenching of photoexcited 1 by O2,38–40 as degradation of 1
or 2 was not observed by 1H nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) spectroscopy. The need for constant light
irradiation—supporting that this is a photo-driven and not
photo-initiated process—was also confirmed by turning the
light source on and off during the capture process (Figure
2B). No formation of 2 was observed in the dark. Overall,
these studies support that the PEDA reaction possesses
fast kinetics, tolerance of contaminants like O 2 and H2O,



and compatibility with visible light irradiation, all of which are
required for operation under realistic conditions.
Enhancing light-driven CO2 release
Achieving efficient light-driven carbon capture is only half of
the story, as a visible light-driven process to drive CO2
release from 2 is also necessary. The direct, light-driven
decarboxylation of 2 has been reported, but it requires
prolonged irradiation with UV light.30 This is because
carboxylic acids such as 2 are resistant to photooxidative
decarboxylation due to their large-magnitude redox
potentials (≥ + 2.0 V vs. SCE).29,41 In contrast, the
corresponding carboxylates such as 3 (Figure 3) are much
easier to photooxidize (+ 0.9–1.4 V vs. SCE).29 The
decarboxylation via β-scission to produce alkyl radicals,
followed by single-electron transfer (SET) and proton
transfer (PT) to return the corresponding alkane (Figure
1F). Unlocking this mechanistic pathway for CO2 release
would require the addition of catalytic base to deprotonate
2 and form 3 as well as the potential addition of a
photoredox catalyst capable of photooxidizing 3. However,
the presence of acids and bases has been shown to
accelerate the decay of photoenols, which could potentially
disrupt the CO2 capture step.42 Remarkably, the addition of
catalytic amounts (15% relative to 1) of K3PO4 under PEDA
conditions with a simulated natural gas power plant
emission stream (10% CO2/3% O2/remainder N2) doubled
the amount of CO2 adduct that formed after 30 min relative
to the base-free conditions (Figure 2A). This finding
eliminates the need to separate the base between the
prospective capture and release steps, keeping the setup
simple.
Typically, photooxidation reactions are conducted using
expensive transition metal photocatalysts, such as Ir-based
complexes.43 However, both inter- and intramolecular
benzophenones have been reported,25,30,44 suggesting that
1, 2, or 3 could be capable of mediating the decarboxylation

of 3 without the need for an added photocatalyst. Strikingly,
simply irradiating 3 with purple light under N2 flow at room
temperature was sufficient to induce near-complete
decarboxylation and formation of 1 (after protonation) after
only 30 min (Figure 3A, Figure S18). Similarly, rapid
decarboxylation can be achieved by pulling slight vacuum
(0.2 atm) on the solution, taking advantage of the low
volatility of 3 and DMSO. As control experiments, irradiating
2 with light or heating 3 at 60 °C in the dark did not result in
detectable decarboxylation, supporting the need for both
base and light to trigger CO2 release (Figure 3A).
Consistently, on/off experiments support that the
decarboxylation of 3 largely occurs only with the light on
(Figure S20). Overall, these findings support that 3 is able
to undergo spontaneous light-driven decarboxylation
without the need for an added photocatalyst.
Further experiments were conducted to elucidate the
photophysical pathway by which 3 undergoes
photodecarboxylation.
(CV)
measurements confirm that 3 undergoes oxidation at a
relatively moderate potential (E1/2 = + 1.15 V vs. SCE,
Figure S26), similar to other benzylic carboxylates.29 By
(Figure
S25)
photoluminescence (PL) measurements (Figure S30), the
excited state redox potential of 2 (E1/2red*, as a surrogate for
3) was estimated to be + 1.06 V vs. SCE, which is close to
that required to photooxidize 3 via an intermolecular
pathway. Attempts to collect PL spectra of 3 resulted in
multiple emission bands, as irradiation with a 355 nm pump
was sufficient to induce decarboxylation and form carbanion
4, identified by a new emission band peaked at 548 nm
(Figure S30). The appearance of the new peak within the
time-resolved PL instrument response function (1 ns) led us
to interrogate intramolecular photodecarboxylation of 3 as
an alternative pathway for CO2 release.



Although various intramolecular photodecarboxylation
pathways of arylacetic acids have been proposed,30,45,46 we
hypothesized that carboxylate 3 may decarboxylate through
intramolecular electron transfer via a biradical intermediate,
similar to ketoprofen.47,48 Using transient absorbance
spectroscopy with 200 fs resolution, we sought to capture
the formation dynamics of 4 through its unique, red-shifted
absorbance spectrum (Figure 3B). Considering first
unreactive 2 in DMSO, characteristic signatures of
benzophenone intersystem crossing upon photoexcitation
were identified: a rapid conversion from a broad, weakly
absorbing photoinduced absorption to the stronger, longlived triplet fingerprint in the >500 nm region (Figure 3C). In
photoexcited 3, we detect the same primary features on the
same timescales (Figure 3D), but superimposed upon these
is an additional photoinduced absorption band. Subtracting
the spectral slices of 3 at 20 ps from those of 2 (ΔΔT in
Figure 3B) to extract the spectrum of the additional species
yields an excellent match to the steady-state absorption
profile of 4. This photoproduct signature is evident
immediately following the 200 fs instrument response,
orders of magnitude faster than would be expected for a
bimolecular process dependent on the rate constant of
diffusion (kdiff ∼1 × 1010 s–1).44 We accordingly conclude that
the photoinduced CO2 release process likely follows an

intramolecular pathway. This observation suggests that the
photodecarboxylation by bypassing the proton transfer
step.30
Supported by density functional theory (DFT) calculations,
we propose the following mechanism for the fully lightdriven CO2 separation process (Figure 4, see Supplemental
Information for details). First, photoexcitation of 1 to B
ultimately yields (Z)-enol D via hydrogen atom transfer to C
followed by a conical intersection. At this point, two
pathways are possible: the photoenol can undergo a DA
reaction with CO225–27 to yield cycloadduct G′ followed by
ring-opening (RO) and PT to form 3, or it can be
deprotonated to yield photoenolate E. DFT calculations
support that the reaction of photoenolate E with CO2 is
significantly faster (ΔG‡ = 29.7 kJ/mol) than the reaction of
photoenol D with CO2 (ΔG‡ = 80.8 kJ/mol). This finding is
consistent with the observed enhancement in CO2 capture
observed in the presence of base (Figure 2A) and indicates
that the photoenolate pathway likely dominates under basic
conditions. Photoenolate E can in turn undergo a DA
reaction with CO2 to form a cycloadduct (akin to G′, see
Supplemental Information) or simply attack it to form 3
directly.49,50 Efforts to locate any potential cycloadduct
structures were unsuccessful; as such, we favor a
mechanistic pathway in which photoenolate E directly



attacks CO2 to form 3. Consistently, the gas phase intrinsic
reaction coordinate calculation for transition state F
resembles nucleophilic attack of CO2 by E (Figure S35).
However, we cannot completely rule out that CO 2 capture
proceeds via a concerted cycloaddition reaction.
The release cycle starts with the photoexcitation of 3 to I,
which can then undergo intramolecular electron transfer to
form J. While some oxidation of 3 by another molecule of I
could occur in an intermolecular fashion, the TA
experiments outlined above (Figure 3D) provide strong
evidence for an intramolecular photodecarboxylation
process. Subsequent loss of CO2 via β-scission to yield K
followed by intersystem crossing and PT returns 1 for
subsequent carbon capture cycles. This mechanistic
analysis suggests that, while the rate of the capture step is
a function of the concentration of 1, the rate of the release
step is conversely dependent on the concentration of 3. As
such, a careful balance between these two species in
solution is necessary to achieve the highest productivity
(amount of CO2 separated per given time) in a carbon
capture process.
Realistic application using sunlight and flue gas
With a unified, fully visible light-driven CO2 separation
system in hand, we evaluated its cycling performance for
removing CO2 from a flue gas emission stream (10%
CO2/3% O2/remainder N2) in a simulated, visible lightdriven, vacuum-swing process (Figure 5). A careful balance

of the concentrations of 1, 2, and 3 in solution is necessary
in order to maximize light absorption by the appropriate
species during the capture (flue gas) and release (N 2,
simulating vacuum) steps. An initial concentration of 1 of 0.1
M was found to be optimal to achieve this balance (Figure
S21). In addition, a weaker base (potassium benzoate,
BzOK) was employed during cycling; although K 3PO4 also
works, its presence leads to gradual deuterium
incorporation into 1 from the solvent DMSO-d6, which
complicates quantification of the relevant species using 1H
NMR. Under the optimized conditions, a working capacity
of 26 mM of CO2 per hour could be achieved for CO2
removal from a simulated natural gas flue emission stream,
with capture and release steps as short as 15 min (Figure
5A, left). No sorbent degradation was observed by 1H NMR
over 5 capture-and-release cycles. Besides O2 and H2O,
trace contaminants in flue gas streams such as NO x can
significantly impede the performance of traditional
sorbents.23 To evaluate the tolerance of our system towards
these contaminants, flue gas from Cornell University’s
natural gas-fired power plant was procured (9.7% CO 2,
3.7% O2, 43 ppm NOx, remainder H2O and N2). Using this
inlet stream, an average of 24 mM of CO2 per hour could be
removed over 3 cycles, similar to that observed with
simulated flue gas (Figure 5A, right). This finding represents
the first example of a light-driven process for CO2 removal
from an actual flue gas stream, demonstrating the utility of
this system for post-combustion carbon capture under
realistic conditions (Figure 5A).
The experiments discussed thus far were all conducted
under irradiation with purple light (390 nm), as it best



overlaps with the UV-vis absorbance profiles of 1 and 3
(Figure S28). However, solar light represents a more ideal
light source for driving carbon capture and release
processes. To evaluate the performance of 1 under solar
light irradiation, its CO2 capture cycling performance from a
simulated flue gas stream was evaluated using a solar
simulator with 2000 W/m2 irradiance (2 Suns). Using longer
absorption/desorption cycling times to adjust for the
decrease in photon flux (Figure S24), an average cycling
capacity of 10 mM per cycle was successfully achieved
(Figure 5B), which is comparable to that obtained using 390
nm LED lamps (13 mM per cycle). Further, the capture of
CO2 using 1 was conducted on the windowsill on a summer
day in Ithaca, New York, United States, and, within an hour,
a similar amount of CO2 was captured from the simulated
flue gas stream as achieved using the solar simulator
(Figure S22). Similarly, the solar-driven release of CO2 from
2 was accomplished with reasonable kinetics as well
(Figure S23). Overall, these experiments showcase the
compatibility of this system for realistic solar-driven
applications.

photodecarboxylation enables a fully visible light-driven
CO2 separation that does not require thermal management.
Such a combination could provide a blueprint for a new
class of chemisorptive chemical separations that employ
(sun)light as the only energy input.
The findings reported herein represent a novel strategy to
separate CO2 from emission streams by harnessing light to
drive both the capture and release steps. Application of this
system under realistic conditions was demonstrated by
capturing CO2 from an actual flue gas stream as well as by
using sunlight as the light source, emphasizing the potential
of this system for utility beyond the laboratory. Future work
will focus on improving the visible light absorption features
of this system to achieve solar light-driven carbon capture
with improved efficiency. More broadly, our system
operates through a novel photoenolate reactivity mode for
CO2 capture, representing a significant departure from
traditional chemistry. Pairing this pathway with

The development of cycloaddition reactions for chemical
separations was supported by the National Science Foundation
(CBET-2047627) (B.I.Z.A., P.J.M.). Any opinions, findings, and
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Science Foundation. Transient absorption and
photoluminescence measurements were supported by the U.S.
Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy
Sciences (DE-SC0024199) (K.Z.C., A.J.M., P.J.M.). Further
support was provided by the Carbontech Development Initiative
(B.I.Z.A., P.J.M.), the Cornell Atkinson Center for Sustainability
through a Graduate Research Grant to B.I.Z.A., and a Camille
Dreyfus Teacher-Scholar Award to P.J.M. (TC-23-048). We also
acknowledge the support of Arkema USA for a fellowship awarded
to B.I.Z.A. This work made use of the Cornell University NMR

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Details regarding the experimental procedures can be found in the
supplemental experimental procedures.
Resource availability
Lead contact
Requests for further information and resources should be directed
to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Phillip J. Milner
Materials availability
This study did not generate new unique materials.
Data and code availability
This study did not generate datasets or code.



Facility, which is supported, in part, by the National Science
Foundation (CHE-1531632). A.J.M. acknowledges further support
from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. K.Z.C. was supported by the
Department of Defense through the National Defense Science &
Engineering Graduate (NDSEG) Fellowship Program.

9.

Dinesh, H., and Pearce, J.M. (2016). The potential of
agrivoltaic systems. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 54, 299–

10.

Hernandez, R.R., Easter, S.B., Murphy-Mariscal, M.L.,
Maestre, F.T., Tavassoli, M., Allen, E.B., Barrows, C.W.,
Belnap, J., Ochoa-Hueso, R., Ravi, S., et al. (2014).
Environmental impacts of utility-scale solar energy. Renew.
Sustain.
Rev.
29,
766–779.

11.

Prats-Salvado, E., Jagtap, N., Monnerie, N., and Sattler, C.
(2024). Solar-Powered Direct Air Capture: Techno-Economic
and Environmental Assessment. Environ. Sci. Technol. 58,

12.

Li, S., Chen, R., Wang, J., Deng, S., Zhou, H., Fang, M.,
Zhang, H., and Yuan, X. (2024). Solar thermal energyassisted direct capture of CO2 from ambient air for methanol
synthesis.
Mater.
Sustain.
2,
1–7.

13.

Romeo, L.M., Lisbona, P., and Lara, Y. (2019). Combined
carbon capture cycles: An opportunity for size and energy
penalty reduction. Int. J. Greenh. Gas Control 88, 290–298.

14.

Long-Innes, R., and Struchtrup, H. (2022). Thermodynamic
loss analysis of a liquid-sorbent direct air carbon capture
plant.
Rep.
Phys.
Sci.
3,
100791.

15.

U.S. Energy Information Administration (2024). Monthly
Energy Review - July 27, 2024.

16.

Super-efficient solar cells: 10 Breakthrough Technologies
Technol.
Rev.
er-efficient-solar-cells-breakthrough-technologies/.

17.

Wilm, L.F.B., Das, M., Janssen-Müller, D., Mück-Lichtenfeld,
C., Glorius, F., and Dielmann, F. (2022). Photoswitchable
Nitrogen Superbases: Using Light for Reversible Carbon
Dioxide Capture. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 61, e202112344.

18.

Premadasa, U.I., Bocharova, V., Miles, A.R., Stamberga, D.,
Belony, S., Bryantsev, V.S., Elgattar, A., Liao, Y., Damron,
J.T., Kidder, M.K., et al. (2023). Photochemically-Driven CO2
Release Using a Metastable-State Photoacid for Energy
Efficient Direct Air Capture. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 62,

19.

de Vries, A., Goloviznina, K., Reiter, M., Salanne, M., and
Lukatskaya, M.R. (2024). Solvation-Tuned Photoacid as a
Stable Light-Driven pH Switch for CO2 Capture and Release.
Chem.
Mater.
36,
1308–1317.

20.

Saha, P., Meeder, J., Singh, S., Ramesh, S., Nippe, M., and
Kwabi, D.G. (2024). Enabling Light-Driven CO2 Removal from
Seawater using Metastable Photoacids. J. Phys. Chem. C

21.

Alfaraidi, A.M., Kudisch, B., Ni, N., Thomas, J., George, T.Y.,
Rajabimoghadam, K., Jiang, H.J., Nocera, D.G., Aziz, M.J.,
and Liu, R.Y. (2023). Reversible CO2 Capture and OnDemand Release by an Acidity-Matched Organic

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization: B.I.Z.A., P.J.M.; Methodology: B.I.Z.A.;
Investigation: B.I.Z.A., K.Z.C.; Visualization: B.I.Z.A., P.J.M.,
K.Z.C.; Funding acquisition: P.J.M., B.I.Z.A., A.J.M.; Project
administration: P.J.M., A.J.M.; Supervision: P.J.M., A.J.M.; Writing
– original draft: B.I.Z.A.; Writing – review and editing: B.I.Z.A.,
K.Z.C., A.J.M, P.J.M.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
P.J.M. and B.I.Z.A. are listed as inventors on a patent that includes
a fully light-driven carbon capture process using photoenols
(Cornell University, international patent application no.
PCT/US24/42589, filed 15 August 2024).
